Squire Dalbridge smiled . It ' s always pretty women in my dreams . Would that I dreamed more often.Jon did not think sleep would come easily, but he knew the Halfhand was right . He found a place out of the wind, beneath an overhang of rock, and took off his cloak to use it for a blanket . Ghost, he called . Here . To me . He always slept better with the great white wolf beside him; there was comfort in the smell of him, and welcome warmth in that shaggy pale fur . This time, though, Ghost did no more than look at him . Then he turned away and padded around the garrons, and quick as that he was gone . He wants to hunt, Jon thought . Perhaps there were goats in these mountains . The shadowcats must live on something . Just don ' t try and bring down a ' cat, he muttered . Even for a direwolf, that would be dangerous . He tugged his cloak over him and stretched out beneath the rock.Mormont stroked the bird ' s black feathers, and stifled a sudden yawn with the back of his hand . I will forsake supper, I believe . Rest will serve me better . Wake me at first light.Do you ever find anyone in your dream? Sam asked.Tormund shook his shaggy head . What fools you kneelers be . Why did you steal the girl if you don ' t want her?And they ' ve built a great wall through my valleys, and fished all the fish from my rills, Ygritte and Tormund sang back at him in turn, in suitably gigantic voices.The others laughed, and even Jon had to smile . The fire he ' d started had not, in truth, burned down that formidable stone tower, but it had done a fair job of gutting the interior of the top two floors, where the Old Bear had his chambers . No one seemed to mind that very much, since it had also destroyed Othor ' s murderous corpse.Jon drew Longclaw from its sheath . Rain washed the steel, and the firelight traced a sullen orange line along the edge . Such a small fire, to cost a man his life . He remembered what Qhorin Halfhand had said when they spied the fire in the Skirling Pass . Fire is life up here, he told them, but it can be death as well . That was high in the Frostfangs, though, in the lawless wild beyond the Wall . This was the Gift, protected by the Night ' s Watch and the power of Winterfell . A man should have been free to build a fire here, without dying for it.Ygritte said, Orell tried to take his eye out.Jon? Samwell Tarly called up . I thought it looked like you . Are you well?The Magnar was direct . Jarl has warned me of crows, patrolling on high . Tell me all you know of these patrols.She would be dead, and I would know you better than I had before . But enough talk . You ought be sleeping . We have leagues to go, and dangers to face . You will need your strength.Die, the raven muttered, pacing along Mormont ' s shoulders . Die, die, die, die . The Old Bear sat slumped and silent, as if the burden of speech had grown too heavy for him to bear . But at last he said, May the gods forgive me . Choose your men.Jon opened a shuttered window, took the flagon of beer off the outside ledge, and filled a horn . Hobb had given him a lemon, still cold from the Wall . Jon crushed it in his fist . The juice trickled through his fingers . Mormont drank lemon in his beer every day, and claimed that was why he still had his own teeth.Yes . Donal was the last . Noye ' s sword was sunk deep in the giant ' s throat, halfway to the hilt . The armorer had always seemed such a big man to Jon, but locked in the giant ' s massive arms he looked almost like a child . The giant crushed his spine . I don ' t know who died first . He took the lantern and moved forward for a better look . Mag . I am the last of the giants . He could feel the sadness there, but he had no time for sadness . It was Mag the Mighty . The king of the giants.No . Just the men who used to live here.Command it? But . . .I will kill him if I must . The prospect gave Jon no joy; there would be no honor in such a killing, and it would mean his own death as well . Yet he could not let the wildlings breach the Wall, to threaten Winterfell and the north, the barrowlands and the Rills, White Harbor and the Stony Shore, even the Neck . For eight thousand years the men of House Stark had lived and died to protect their people against such ravagers and reavers . . . and bastard-born or no, the same blood ran in his veins . Bran and Rickon are still at Winterfell besides . Maester Luwin, Ser Rodrik, Old Nan, Farlen the kennelmaster, Mikken at his forge and Gage by his ovens . . . everyone I ever knew, everyone I ever loved . If Jon must slay a man he half admired and almost liked to save them from the mercies of Rattleshirt and Harma Dogshead and the earless Magnar of Thenn, that was what he meant to do.King, croaked the raven . The bird flapped across the solar to land on Mormont ' s shoulder . King, it said again, strutting back and forth.Tormund Thunderfist cracked a gap-toothed smile . He asked me if that was my daughter riding there beside me, with her smooth pink cheeks . The wildling shook snow from his arm and turned his horse about . It may be he never saw a man without a beard before . Come, we start back . Mance grows sore wroth when I ' m not found in my accustomed place.Your Bael was a liar, he told her, certain now.Jon took the horse in hand and held him still, so he could count the giants emerging from the blowing snow and pale mists that swirled along the Milkwater . He was well beyond fifty when Tormund said something and he lost the count . There must be hundreds . No matter how many went past, they just seemed to keep coming.Then you must send scouts into the mountains.Did you hear that? Noye asked.The pale pink light of dawn sparkled on branch and leaf and stone . Every blade of grass was carved from emerald, every drip of water turned to diamond . Flowers and mushrooms alike wore coats of glass . Even the mud puddles had a bright brown sheen . Through the shimmering greenery, the black tents of his brothers were encased in a fine glaze of ice.Jon hopped down . [BOS] Well enough . How did you fare today? [EOS] Jon agreed . [BOS] One, my lord, Brothers returning . [EOS] How do we fight them if we can ' t see them? Horse asked.Ser Jaremy, the Old Bear asked gruffly, Ben Stark had six men with him when he rode from the Wall . Where are the others?Shall I call the guards?Ghost slid past him, out the door . The wolf started up the steps, stopped, looked back at Jon . That was when he heard it; the soft scrape of a boot on stone, the sound of a latch turning . The sounds came from above . From the Lord Commander ' s chambers.They tell me she is comely.Others were gathering around and looking at him curiously . Jon noticed Grenn a few feet away . A thick woolen bandage was wrapped around one hand . He looked anxious and uncomfortable, not menacing at all . Jon went to him . Grenn edged backward and put up his hands . Stay away from me now, you bastard.You got no wolf to help you here, boy . Rattleshirt reached for his own sword.I want no courtesies either, Mormont said, so thank me no thanks . Honor the steel with deeds, not words.I prayed for it, she said dully . He was my special boy . I went to the sept and prayed seven times to the seven faces of god that Ned would change his mind and leave him here with me . Sometimes prayers are answered.I ' ll not be going there, I promise you.Jon . . . it grieves me to say, but Lord Commander Mormont was murdered at Craster ' s Keep, at the hands of his Sworn Brothers.And we are going beyond it.Everywhere . Harma Dogshead was seen at Woodswatch-by-the-Pool, Rattleshirt at Long Barrow, the Weeper near Icemark . All along the Wall . . . they ' re here, they ' re there, they ' re climbing near Queensgate, they ' re hacking at the gates of Greyguard, they ' re massing against Eastwatch . . . but one glimpse of a black cloak and they ' re gone . Next day they ' re somewhere else.There were no true hills here, but Mance Rayder ' s white fur tent had been raised on a spot of high stony ground right on the edge of the trees . The King-beyond-the-Wall was waiting outside, his ragged red-and-black cloak blowing in the wind . Harma Dogshead was with him, Jon saw, back from her raids and feints along the Wall, and Varamyr Sixskins as well, attended by his shadowcat and two lean grey wolves.He died on the sword of a brave man named Donal Noye.There was no use telling him that Robert Baratheon was dead . He would forget it, as he ' d forgotten it before . Jon agreed . That seemed to make Owen happy . [BOS] Maester Aemon sent him a bird, [EOS] The huge carcass of a dead mammoth partially blocked the way . One of the beast ' s tusks snagged his cloak and tore it as he edged past . Three more giants lay outside, half buried beneath stone and slush and hardened pitch . He could see where the fire had melted the Wall, where great sheets of ice had come sloughing off in the heat to shatter on the blackened ground . He looked up at where they ' d come from . When you stand here it seems immense, as if it were about to crush you.I won.Sam swallowed, stepped back, and scurried out so quickly he almost tripped over the rushes.The kettle was in the corner by the hearth, a big black potbellied thing with two huge handles and a heavy lid . Maester Aemon said a word to Sam and Clydas and they went and grabbed the handles and dragged the kettle over to the table . A few of the brothers were already queueing up by the token barrels as Clydas took the lid off and almost dropped it on his foot . With a raucous scream and a clap of wings, a huge raven burst out of the kettle . It flapped upward, seeking the rafters perhaps, or a window to make its escape, but there were no rafters in the vault, nor windows either . The raven was trapped . Cawing loudly, it circled the hall, once, twice, three times . And Jon heard Samwell Tarly shout, I know that bird! That ' s Lord Mormont ' s raven!I don ' t even know your name.You must not balk, whatever is asked of you, the Halfhand had said . Ride with them, eat with them, fight with them, for as long as it takes . He ' d ridden many leagues and walked for more, had shared their bread and salt, and Ygritte ' s blankets as well, but still they did not trust him . Day and night the Thenns watched him, alert for any signs of betrayal . He could not get away, and soon it would be too late.You fought us hard here . Tormund turned his garron back toward the wildling camp . You and your brothers . I give you that . Two hundred dead, and a dozen giants . Mag himself went in that gate o ' yours and never did come out.Jon said warily . There was a trap here . He felt it closing around him . [BOS] Ser Rodrik Cassel, [EOS] After that the days and nights blurred one into the other . They slept in their saddles and stopped only long enough to feed and water the garrons, then mounted up again . Over bare rock they rode, through gloomy pine forests and drifts of old snow, over icy ridges and across shallow rivers that had no names . Sometimes Qhorin or Stonesnake would loop back to sweep away their tracks, but it was a futile gesture . They were watched . At every dawn and every dusk they saw the eagle soaring between the peaks, no more than a speck in the vastness of the sky.For this night …, Halder trotted in from the left.Jon had never been half the hunter that Theon was, but he was no stranger to the longbow either . There were dark shapes slipping around the armory, backs against the stone, but he could not see them well enough to waste an arrow . He heard distant shouts, and saw the archers on the Tower of Guards loosing shafts at the ground . That was too far off to concern Jon . But when he glimpsed three shadows detach themselves from the old stables fifty yards away, he stepped up to the crenel, raised his bow, and drew . They were running, so he led them, waiting, waiting . . .Pyp was the first to see Jon . He grinned at the sight of Ghost, put two fingers in his mouth, and whistled as only a mummer ' s boy could whistle . The shrill sound cut through the clamor like a sword . As Jon walked toward the tables, more of the brothers took note, and fell quiet . A hush spread across the cellar, until the only sounds were Jon ' s heels clicking on the stone floor, and the soft crackle of the logs in the hearth.But he died, said Rattleshirt, same like you . He freed his battle-axe, brandishing it above his head . Good steel it was, with a wicked gleam to both blades; Ebben was never a man to neglect his weapons . The other wildlings crowded forward beside him, yelling taunts . A few chose Jon for their mockery . Is that your wolf, boy? a skinny youth called, unlimbering a stone flail . He ' ll be my cloak before the sun is down . On the other side of the line, another spearwife opened her ragged furs to show Jon a heavy white breast . Does the baby want his momma? Come, have a suck o ' this, boy . The dogs were barking too.Jon knew the song, though it was strange to hear it here, in a shaggy hide tent beyond the Wall, ten thousand leagues from the red mountains and warm winds of Dorne.You ' re too stupid to be craven, Pyp told him.Certainly . Marsh frowned at Jon ' s tone . And you will run his messages, keep a fire burning in his chambers, change his sheets and blankets daily, and do all else that the Lord Commander might require of you.Jon had no answer for him . The raven was pecking at an egg, breaking the shell . Pushing his beak through the hole, he pulled out morsels of white and yoke.Lord Commander Mormont had taken up residence in the King ' s Tower after the fire had gutted his own . Jon left Ghost with the guards outside the door . More stairs, said Sam miserably as they started up . I hate stairs.He is, Jon was forced to say.Jon hailed him . [BOS] Lord Commander Mormont would see you at once . I ' ll show you to his tent . [EOS] Eagles have sharper eyes than men . We are seen . So now we run . The Halfhand wound a long black scarf around his face and swung up into the saddle.You can have mine too, said Satin . I ' m not hungry.Jon said . [BOS] Cotter Pyke and Ser Denys Mallister are no fools, sire, They ' re good men, and capable . Othell Yarwyck as well, in his own way . Lord Mormont trusted each of them . [EOS] You know?Would that I knew, said Qhorin . Your wolf saw their diggings in the valley of the Milkwater . What did they seek, in such a bleak and distant place? Did they find it? That is what you must learn, before you return to Lord Mormont and your brothers . That is the duty I lay on you, Jon Snow.I will not eat Craster ' s food, he decided suddenly . Jon shooed the raven off Longclaw . The bird hopped back to Mormont ' s shoulder, where it promptly shat . [BOS] I broke my fast with the men, my lord . You might have done that on Snow instead of saving it for me, [EOS] the Old Bear grumbled . The raven quorked.Jon gave his garron the last of the oats and stroked his shaggy mane while Ghost prowled restlessly amongst the rocks . He pulled his gloves on tighter and flexed his burnt fingers . I am the shield that guards the realms of men.It ' s not, Mormont told him . Gods save us, boy, you ' re not blind and you ' re not stupid . When dead men come hunting in the night, do you think it matters who sits the Iron Throne?I would be pleased to eat, Your Grace . And thank you.The way before us is perilous enough, lad, said Squire Dalbridge . One shout when we need silence, and every man of us is doomed.King, the bird said again.The Others . . .Bastard children were born from lust and lies, men said; their nature was wanton and treacherous . Once Jon had meant to prove them wrong, to show his lord father that he could be as good and true a son as Robb . I made a botch of that . Robb had become a hero king; if Jon was remembered at all, it would be as a turncloak, an oathbreaker, and a murderer . He was glad that Lord Eddard was not alive to see his shame.Most days he gave as good as he got, Jon liked to think, but not today . He had hardly slept last night, and after an hour of restless tossing he had given up even the attempt, dressed, and walked the top of the Wall till the sun came up, wrestling with Stannis Baratheon ' s offer . The lack of sleep was catching up with him now, and Emmett was hammering him mercilessly across the yard, driving him back on his heels with one long looping cut after another, and slamming him with his shield from time to time for good measure . Jon ' s arm had gone numb from the shock of impact, and the edgeless practice sword seemed to be growing heavier with every passing moment.Jon turned his horse back the way they ' d come . It was pleasant to have the rain out of his face, if only for a little while . Everyone he passed seemed to be weeping . The march was strung out through half a mile of woods . [BOS] Aye, my lord . [EOS] Jon shrugged . [BOS] There ' s hot cider to drink, or mulled wine if you prefer . Some nights Dareon sings for us, if the mood is on him . He was a singer, before … well, not truly, but almost, an apprentice singer . [EOS] No need for that, my lord, said Ser Alliser . Lord Snow will do as we ask . He wants to show us that he is no turncloak . He wants to prove himself a loyal man of the Night ' s Watch.I can walk.Truly . I ' m to assist Maester Aemon with the library and the birds . He needs someone who can read and write letters.Jon said . [BOS] He brought down part, On his head . [EOS] The Wall loomed before them, glimmering palely in the light of the half moon . In the sky above, the stars burned clear and sharp . Are they going to make me go up there? Sam asked . His face curdled like old milk as he looked at the great wooden stairs . I ' ll die if I have to climb that.He walked to the Lord Commander ' s Tower alone, with a curious sense of apprehension . The brothers on guard eyed him solemnly as he approached . The Old Bear ' s in his solar, one of them announced . He was asking for you.I remember.My father is no traitor, he told the direwolf when the rest had gone . Ghost looked at him in silence . Jon slumped against the wall, hands around his knees, and stared at the candle on the table beside his narrow bed . The flame flickered and swayed, the shadows moved around him, the room seemed to grow darker and colder . I will not sleep tonight, Jon thought.A sheepskin cloak! said Ygritte . And there ' s many a night we dance beneath it, too!Oh, bleed that, the little man said . He pushed himself off the ledge into empty air . Jon gasped, then watched with awe as Tyrion Lannister spun around in a tight ball, landed lightly on his hands, then vaulted backward onto his legs.What ' s wrong with flowers?I am no lord, Jon Snow . Qhorin slid the stone smoothly along the steel with his two-fingered hand.Sam took a bird from one of the cages, stroked its feathers, attached the message, and said, Fly home now, brave one . Home . The raven quorked something unintelligible back at him, and Sam tossed it into the air . Flapping, it beat its way skyward through the trees . I wish he could carry me with him.Jon told Sam what he had seen and heard in Craster ' s Keep . [BOS] A midden heap with a roof and a firepit . [EOS] Jon said, truthfully . [BOS] The villages were deserted, It was as if all the free folk had vanished . [EOS] Aemon ' s lived too long, my lord, Ser Alliser assured him . His wits have gone dark as his eyes.I know all the names . Save your breath . He walked away, Ghost at his side . The rain had dwindled to a thin drizzle by the time he reached the gate . Dusk would be on them soon, followed by another wet dark dismal night . The clouds would hide moon and stars and Mormont ' s Torch, turning the woods black as pitch . Every piss would be an adventure, if not quite of the sort Jon Snow had once envisioned.Sometimes I dream about it, he said . I ' m walking down this long empty hall . My voice echoes all around, but no one answers, so I walk faster, opening doors, shouting names . I don ' t even know who I ' m looking for . Most nights it ' s my father, but sometimes it ' s Robb instead, or my little sister Arya, or my uncle . The thought of Benjen Stark saddened him; his uncle was still missing . The Old Bear had sent out rangers in search of him . Ser Jaremy Rykker had led two sweeps, and Quorin Halfhand had gone forth from the Shadow Tower, but they ' d found nothing aside from a few blazes in the trees that his uncle had left to mark his way . In the stony highlands to the northwest, the marks stopped abruptly and all trace of Ben Stark vanished.Ghost kept pace with them for almost half a mile, red tongue lolling from his mouth . Man and horse alike lowered their heads as he asked the mare for more speed . The wolf slowed, stopped, watching, his eyes glowing red in the moonlight . He vanished behind, but Jon knew he would follow, at his own pace.Your losses haven ' t been that heavy.Jon replied . Under his mail and leather, his shoulder was throbbing . He sheathed his sword and tried to remove his helm, but when he raised his arm, the pain made him grit his teeth . [BOS] For an instant, you did, [EOS] We shall await you atop the Wall, said Melisandre . We, Jon heard, not he . It ' s as they say . This is his true queen, not the one he left at Eastwatch.The other boys gathered round the eight who had been named, laughing and cursing and offering congratulations . Halder smacked Toad on the butt with the flat of his sword and shouted, Toad, of the Night ' s Watch! Yelling that a black brother needed a horse, Pyp leapt onto Grenn ' s shoulders, and they tumbled to the ground, rolling and punching and hooting . Dareon dashed inside the armory and returned with a skin of sour red . As they passed the wine from hand to hand, grinning like fools, Jon noticed Samwell Tarly standing by himself beneath a bare dead tree in the corner of the yard . Jon offered him the skin . A swallow of wine?He won ' t hurt you . He knew at once what had happened; a wooden hutch, its slats shattered, lay on its side in the wet grass . He must have been hungry . We haven ' t seen much game . Jon whistled . The direwolf bolted down the rabbit, crunching the small bones between his teeth, and padded over to him.They shared the same sleeping skins every night, and he went to sleep with her head against his chest and her red hair tickling his chin . The smell of her had become a part of him . Her crooked teeth, the feel of her breast when he cupped it in his hand, the taste of her mouth . . . they were his joy and his despair . Many a night he lay with Ygritte warm beside him, wondering if his lord father had felt this confused about his mother, whoever she had been . Ygritte set the trap and Mance Rayder pushed me into it.I have a place at court, though, the dwarf said, smiling . A word in the right ear, and you ' ll die a sour old man before you get another boy to train . Now tell Snow why the Old Bear needs to see him . Is there news of his uncle?Whose laws? The laws of Winterfell and King ' s Landing? Mance laughed . When we want laws we ' ll make our own . You can keep your king ' s justice too, and your king ' s taxes . I ' m offering you the horn, not our freedom . We will not kneel to you.Maester Aemon smiled . And so?You are a free man now, and Ygritte is a free woman . What dishonor if you lay together?Smallwood says Craster is a friend to the Watch.Once the horse had settled, Ghost loped along easily beside him . Jon caught up to Mormont as he was wending his way around a hawthorn thicket . Is the bird away? the Old Bear asked.It was Dalla who answered him, Dalla great with child, lying on her pile of furs beside the brazier . We free folk know things you kneelers have forgotten . Sometimes the short road is not the safest, Jon Snow . The Horned Lord once said that sorcery is a sword without a hilt . There is no safe way to grasp it.Jon nodded weakly . The door swung open . Pyp led them in, followed by Clydas and the lantern . It was all Jon could do to keep up with Maester Aemon . The ice pressed close around them, and he could feel the cold seeping into his bones, the weight of the Wall above his head . It felt like walking down the gullet of an ice dragon . The tunnel took a twist, and then another . Pyp unlocked a second iron gate . They walked farther, turned again, and saw light ahead, faint and pale through the ice . That ' s bad, Jon knew at once . That ' s very bad.North or south, singers always find a ready welcome, so Bael ate at Lord Stark ' s own table, and played for the lord in his high seat until half the night was gone . The old songs he played, and new ones he ' d made himself, and he played and sang so well that when he was done, the lord offered to let him name his own reward . ‘ All I ask is a flower, ' Bael answered, ‘ the fairest flower that blooms in the gardens o ' Winterfell . ’Dead, the raven said . Dead . Dead.You . You must lead.Jon Snow remembered the wight rising, its eyes shining blue in the pale dead face . He knew why, he was certain.In legend, Brandon the Builder had used giants to help raise Winterfell, but Jon did not want to confuse the issue . Men can build a lot higher than this . In Oldtown there ' s a tower taller than the Wall . He could tell she did not believe him . If I could show her Winterfell . . . give her a flower from the glass gardens, feast her in the Great Hall, and show her the stone kings on their thrones . We could bathe in the hot pools, and love beneath the heart tree while the old gods watched over us.Let me, a voice said . Thick-fingered hands unfastened helm from gorget and lifted it off gently . Did he hurt you?Noye had put the women and children to work as well . Those too young to fight would carry water and tend the fires, the Mole ' s Town midwife would assist Clydas and Maester Aemon with any wounded, and Three-Finger Hobb suddenly had more spit boys, kettle stirrers, and onion choppers than he knew what to do with . Two of the whores had even offered to fight, and had shown enough skill with the crossbow to be given a place on the steps forty feet up.Outside, everything was noise and confusion . Wagons were being loaded, men were shouting, horses were being harnessed and saddled and led from the stables . A light snow had begun to fall, and everyone was in an uproar to be off.They ' ve sent me to treat with the King-beyond-the-Wall.In the dark, the direwolf ' s red eyes looked black . He nuzzled at Jon ' s neck, silent as ever, his breath a hot mist . The wildlings called Jon Snow a warg, but if so he was a poor one . He did not know how to put on a wolf skin, the way Orell had with his eagle before he ' d died . Once Jon had dreamed that he was Ghost, looking down upon the valley of the Milkwater where Mance Rayder had gathered his people, and that dream had turned out to be true . But he was not dreaming now, and that left him only words.Tyrion Lannister was sitting on the ledge above the door to the Great Hall, looking for all the world like a gargoyle . The dwarf grinned down at him . Is that animal a wolf?Jon asked him . [BOS] Did Sam sleep in the hall last night? [EOS] Jon ' s throat was raw . He looked at them all helplessly . [BOS] She yielded herself to me . [EOS] Jon saw the start of fright on Sam ' s face as he lumbered up on his mare; doubtless he thought he was in trouble . You ' re fat but you ' re not stupid, boy, the Old Bear said gruffly . You did well back there . And you, Snow.They could see the fire in the night, glimmering against the side of the mountain like a fallen star . It burned redder than the other stars, and did not twinkle, though sometimes it flared up bright and sometimes dwindled down to no more than a distant spark, dull and faint.I did not know, said Jon truthfully, trying to remember the face of the man he had slain in the pass . You told me Mance would take me.Jon went to cut more branches, snapping each one in two before tossing it into the flames . The tree had been dead a long time, but it seemed to live again in the fire, as fiery dancers woke within each stick of wood to whirl and spin in their glowing gowns of yellow, red, and orange.Them . Three hundred of them . Whatever is asked, the Halfhand said . So why do I feel so craven? Two hundred from Castle Black, and one hundred from the Shadow Tower.Lord Snow . Ser Alliser Thorne had named him that, to mock his bastard birth . Many of his brothers had taken to using it as well, some with affection, others to wound . But suddenly it had a different sound to it in Jon ' s ears . It sounded . . . real . Yes, he said, hesitantly, kings have legitimized bastards before, but . . . I am still a brother of the Night ' s Watch . I knelt before a heart tree and swore to hold no lands and father no children.You are as hopeless as any boys I have ever trained, Ser Alliser Thorne announced when they had all assembled in the yard . Your hands were made for manure shovels, not for swords, and if it were up to me, the lot of you would be set to herding swine . But last night I was told that Gueren is marching five new boys up the kingsroad . One or two may even be worth the price of piss . To make room for them, I have decided to pass eight of you on to the Lord Commander to do with as he will . He called out the names one by one . Toad . Stone Head . Aurochs . Lover . Pimple . Monkey . Ser Loon . Last, he looked at Jon . And the Bastard.Satin pissed himself when the horns blew, but Jon pretended not to notice . Go shake Dick by the shoulder, he told the Oldtown boy, else he ' s liable to sleep through the fight.Qhorin Halfhand . The girl looked half a child beside him, but she faced him boldly.Sam mopped at the sweat on his brow . You … you can see where Ghost … Jon ' s direwolf … you can see where he tore off that man ' s hand, and yet … the stump hasn ' t bled, look … He waved a hand . My father … L-lord Randyll, he, he made me watch him dress animals sometimes, when … after … Sam shook his head from side to side, his chins quivering . Now that he had looked at the bodies, he could not seem to look away . A fresh kill … the blood would still flow, my lords . Later … later it would be clotted, like a … a jelly, thick and … and … He looked as though he was going to be sick . This man … look at the wrist, it ' s all … crusty … dry … like …Maybe it is so, Maester Aemon said . Tell me, Chett, what would you have us do with such a boy?In an open space surrounded by tall green soldier pines, Rattleshirt dismounted . We ' ll make camp here, he told Lenyl and Ragwyle and the others . Feed the horses, then the dogs, then yourself . Ygritte, Longspear, bring the crow so Mance can have his look . We ' ll gut him after.Even then, Ser Alliser would not call an end . On your feet, Ser Piggy, he called . Pick up your sword . When the boy continued to cling to the ground, Thorne gestured to Halder . Hit him with the flat of your blade until he finds his feet . Halder delivered a tentative smack to his foe ' s upraised cheeks . You can hit harder than that, Thorne taunted . Halder took hold of his longsword with both hands and brought it down so hard the blow split leather, even on the flat . The new boy screeched in pain.Mormont lifted his eyes from the letter to stare at Jon . There was pity in that look; he could taste it . You heard me.Ride? It was dark beyond the fire, and the night was cold . Ride where?You made her yield to you.The Wall did not awe Jarl ' s raiders, Jon saw . They have done this before, every man of them . Jarl called out names when they dismounted beneath the ridge, and eleven gathered round him . All were young . The oldest could not have been more than five-and-twenty, and two of the ten were younger than Jon . Every one was lean and hard, though; they had a look of sinewy strength that reminded him of Stonesnake, the brother the Halfhand had sent off afoot when Rattleshirt was hunting them.Jon asked her . He did not know if he could face those heights again, or if his garron could survive a second crossing . [BOS] Will we return by the Skirling Pass? [EOS] Finally the cage came clanking back down, swaying at the end of the long chain, and they crowded in silently and shut the door.All Jon could hear was the falling water and the faint crackle of flames . This way under the Wall was lost as well?Wind and fire did the rest . All Jon had to do was watch . With flames below and flames above, the wildlings had nowhere to go . Some continued upward, and died . Some went downward, and died . Some stayed where they were . They died as well . Many leapt from the steps before they burned, and died from the fall . Twenty-odd Thenns were still huddled together between the fires when the ice cracked from the heat, and the whole lower third of the stair broke off, along with several tons of ice . That was the last that Jon Snow saw of Styr, the Magnar of Thenn . The Wall defends itself, he thought.My sword is Valyrian steel . The Old Bear gave it to me.Jon was taken aback . It was true, Lord Eddard had often made Robb part of his councils back at Winterfell . Could Sam be right? Even a bastard could rise high in the Night ' s Watch, they said . [BOS] I never asked for this, [EOS] he said stubbornly.Satin, Horse, and the others were looking to him, Jon knew, waiting for his orders . He was so tired, he hardly knew any more . The Wall is mine, he reminded himself . Owen, Horse, to the catapults . Kegs, you and Spare Boot on the scorpions . The rest of you string your bows . Fire arrows . Let ' s see if we can burn it . It was likely to be a futile gesture, Jon knew, but it had to be better than standing helpless.Samwell Tarly managed a sad little smile . I was never very safe in my father ' s castle either.They could take him back, Jon told himself, but they could not make him stay . The war would not end on the morrow, or the day after, and his friends could not watch him day and night . He would bide his time, make them think he was content to remain here … and then, when they had grown lax, he would be off again . Next time he would avoid the kingsroad . He could follow the Wall east, perhaps all the way to the sea, a longer route but a safer one . Or even west, to the mountains, and then south over the high passes . That was the wildling ' s way, hard and perilous, but at least no one would follow him . He wouldn ' t stray within a hundred leagues of Winterfell or the kingsroad.The hill jutted above the dense tangle of forest, rising solitary and sudden, its windswept heights visible from miles off . The wildlings called it the Fist of the First Men, rangers said . It did look like a fist, Jon Snow thought, punching up through earth and wood, its bare brown slopes knuckled with stone.No . He shook his head . Never . I won ' t.The first time he had seen Castle Black with his own eyes, Jon had wondered why anyone would be so foolish as to build a castle without walls . How could it be defended?Eighty years or close enough, the Old Bear said, and no, I still hadn ' t been born, though Aemon had forged half a dozen links of his maester ' s chain by then . Aerys wed his own sister, as the Targaryens were wont to do, and reigned for ten or twelve years . Aemon took his vows and left the Citadel to serve at some lordling ' s court . . . until his royal uncle died without issue . The Iron Throne passed to the last of King Daeron ' s four sons . That was Maekar, Aemon ' s father . The new king summoned all his sons to court and would have made Aemon part of his councils, but he refused, saying that would usurp the place rightly belonging to the Grand Maester . Instead he served at the keep of his eldest brother, another Daeron . Well, that one died too, leaving only a feeble-witted daughter as heir . Some pox he caught from a whore, I believe . The next brother was Aerion.When the moon rose, Ebben parted from them . Stonesnake went east with him a short way, then doubled back to obscure their tracks, and the three who remained set off toward the southwest.Ser Alliser ' s onyx eyes were fixed on Jon Snow . It would seem our Bastard is in love, he said as Jon helped the fat boy to his feet . Show me your steel, Lord Snow.Ser Alliser Thorne surveyed the scene with disgust . The mummer ' s farce has gone on long enough for today . He walked away . The session was at an end.It is, my lord, Ser Jaremy said . It will be done.Very well, truly, the fat boy lied . I am so happy for you all . His round face quivered as he forced a smile . You will be First Ranger someday, just as your uncle was.Tormund rose to his feet . Hold . You gave Styr his style, give me mine.Dareon broke off and lifted his visor . Seven gods, he murmured . Would you look at this, Jon.Jon smiled.Belike we need to flush the crows, Rattleshirt bellowed over the clamor . Feather them!Jon met Ygritte ' s eyes, and had no words.They ' ll move . Rattleshirt ' s voice was thick and angry.The air smelled of paper and dust and years . Before him, tall wooden shelves rose up into dimness, crammed with leatherbound books and bins of ancient scrolls . A faint yellow glow filtered through the stacks from some hidden lamp . Jon blew out the taper he carried, preferring not to risk an open flame amidst so much old dry paper . Instead he followed the light, wending his way down the narrow aisles beneath barrel-vaulted ceilings . All in black, he was a shadow among shadows, dark of hair, long of face, grey of eye . Black moleskin gloves covered his hands; the right because it was burned, the left because a man felt half a fool wearing only one glove.Pity, we could use a horse like that.Aye, those three I recall . The lordling no older than one of these pups . Too proud to sleep under my roof, him in his sable cloak and black steel . My wives give him big cow eyes all the same . He turned his squint on the nearest of the women . Gared says they were chasing raiders . I told him, with a commander that green, best not catch ' em . Gared wasn ' t half-bad, for a crow . Had less ears than me, that one . The ' bite took ' em, same as mine . Craster laughed . Now I hear he got no head neither . The ' bite do that too?What do you make of them, Snow? Donal Noye stood in the door of his armory, bare-chested under a leather apron, the stump of his left arm uncovered for once . With his big gut and barrel chest, his flat nose and bristly black jaw, Noye did not make a pretty sight, but he was a welcome one nonetheless . The armorer had proved himself a good friend.Would that we had another hand to send to Renly.Do it, she urged him after a moment . Bastard . Do it . I can ' t stay brave forever . When the blow did not fall she turned her head to look at him.Best talk of this inside . Jon will fetch you a horn of ale . Or would you prefer hot spiced wine?A cloak?The views atop the hill were bracing, yet it was the ringwall that drew Jon ' s eye, the weathered grey stones with their white patches of lichen, their beards of green moss . It was said that the Fist had been a ringfort of the First Men in the Dawn Age . An old place, and strong, Thoren Smallwood said.Jon told him . He had seen little of the dwarf since their journey ended . As the queen ' s own brother, Tyrion Lannister had been an honored guest of the Night ' s Watch . The Lord Commander had given him rooms in the King ' s Tower—so-called, though no king had visited it for a hundred years—and Lannister dined at Mormont ' s own table and spent his days riding the Wall and his nights dicing and drinking with Ser Alliser and Bowen Marsh and the other high officers . [BOS] You won ' t learn anything from me, [EOS] Sam nodded miserably . I hate the cold, he said . Last night I woke up in the dark and the fire had gone out and I was certain I was going to freeze to death by morning.Jon remembered a spray of red blood on white snow, and the way Theon Greyjoy had kicked the dead man ' s head . The man was a deserter . On the way back to Winterfell, Jon and Robb had raced, and found six direwolf pups in the snow . A thousand years ago.That ' s not for me to say, my lord.Jon demanded . [BOS] What do you want with me? [EOS] Jon said sullenly . He did not care to talk of his father ' s death, not even to Mormont . [BOS] I remember, [EOS] Blood, said Mance Rayder . I ' d win in the end, yes, but you ' d bleed me, and my people have bled enough.If we return . . .No . They hate you because you act like you ' re better than they are . They look at you and see a castle-bred bastard who thinks he ' s a lordling . The armorer leaned close . You ' re no lordling . Remember that . You ' re a Snow, not a Stark . You ' re a bastard and a bully.Jon waited by the cold iron bars while Pyp went to Maester Aemon for the spare key . Surprisingly, the maester himself returned with him, and Clydas with a lantern . Come see me when we are done, the old man told Jon while Pyp was fumbling with the chains . I need to change your dressing and apply a fresh poultice, and you will want some more dreamwine for the pain.You best not be lying, girl, Rattleshirt said to Ygritte, his eyes shiny behind the giant ' s skull.There were tears on Ygritte ' s cheeks when the song ended.We ' ll hear no scolds from you, bastard . Chett blamed Jon for the loss of his comfortable position with Maester Aemon, and not without justice . If he had not gone to Aemon about Sam Tarly, Chett would still be tending an old blind man instead of a pack of ill-tempered hunting hounds . You may be the Lord Commander ' s pet, but you ' re not the Lord Commander . . . and you wouldn ' t talk so bloody bold without that monster of yours always about.A nightmare this might be, yet it was no dream.Jon felt compelled to say . [BOS] She yielded, [EOS] The mouth of the cave was a cleft in the rock barely wide enough for a horse, half concealed behind a soldier pine . It opened to the north, so the glows of the fires within would not be visible from the Wall . Even if by some mischance a patrol should happen to pass atop the Wall tonight, they would see nothing but hills and pines and the icy sheen of starlight on a half-frozen lake . Mance Rayder had planned his thrust well.Four that you ' ve humiliated in the yard . Four who are probably afraid of you . I ' ve watched you fight . It ' s not training with you . Put a good edge on your sword, and they ' d be dead meat; you know it, I know it, they know it . You leave them nothing . You shame them . Does that make you proud?Jarman Buckwell . He returned a fortnight past . His scouts claim they saw you with their own eyes, riding along beside the wildling column and wearing a sheepskin cloak . Noye eyed him . I see the last part ' s true.The Watch will make good for them . Jon had no coin of his own, or he would have offered it to her . . . though he was not sure what good a few coppers or even a silver piece would do her beyond the Wall . I ' ll speak to Lord Mormont on the morrow.The three of them took up positions on three sides of the round tower . Jon hung a quiver from his belt and pulled an arrow . The shaft was black, the fletching grey . As he notched it to his string, he remembered something that Theon Greyjoy had once said after a hunt . The boar can keep his tusks and the bear his claws, he had declared, smiling that way he did . There ' s nothing half so mortal as a grey goose feather.All you have to give, Jon Snow . He is a king.Never mind about comets, it ' s maps the Old Bear wants.The raven gave a cackling scream, but the Old Bear smiled through the grey of his beard . This many men and horses leave a trail even Aemon could follow . On this hill, our fires ought to be visible as far off as the foothills of the Frostfangs . If Ben Stark is alive and free, he will come to us, I have no doubt.Do you know ‘ The Last of the Giants ’? Without waiting for an answer Ygritte said, You need a deeper voice than mine to do it proper . Then she sang, Ooooooh, I am the last of the giants, my people are gone from the earth.Then a sudden gust of cold made his fur stand up, and the air thrilled to the sound of wings . As he lifted his eyes to the ice-white mountain heights above, a shadow plummeted out of the sky . A shrill scream split the air . He glimpsed blue-grey pinions spread wide, shutting out the sun . . .What bear? Was there a bear?Might be you won ' t like it much.A vast blue-white wall plugged one end of the vale, squeezing between the mountains as if it had shouldered them aside, and for a moment he thought he had dreamed himself back to Castle Black . Then he realized he was looking at a river of ice several thousand feet high . Under that glittering cold cliff was a great lake, its deep cobalt waters reflecting the snowcapped peaks that ringed it . There were men down in the valley, he saw now; many men, thousands, a huge host . Some were tearing great holes in the half-frozen ground, while others trained for war . He watched as a swarming mass of riders charged a shield wall, astride horses no larger than ants . The sound of their mock battle was a rustling of steel leaves, drifting faintly on the wind . Their encampment had no plan to it; he saw no ditches, no sharpened stakes, no neat rows of horse lines . Everywhere crude earthen shelters and hide tents sprouted haphazardly, like a pox on the face of the earth . He spied untidy mounds of hay, smelled goats and sheep, horses and pigs, dogs in great profusion . Tendrils of dark smoke rose from a thousand cookfires.Yes . I think so.For a moment Jon thought he had misheard . It had sounded as if Noye were leaving him in command . My lord?They are still his brothers, declared Styr.Truly, the gods had heard Jon ' s prayer that night; the fire had caught in the dead man ' s clothing and consumed him as if his flesh were candle wax and his bones old dry wood . Jon had only to close his eyes to see the thing staggering across the solar, crashing against the furniture and flailing at the flames . It was the face that haunted him most; surrounded by a nimbus of fire, hair blazing like straw, the dead flesh melting away and sloughing off its skull to reveal the gleam of bone beneath.Fire is life up here, said Qhorin Halfhand, but it can be death as well . By his command, they ' d risked no open flames since entering the mountains . They ate cold salt beef, hard bread, and harder cheese, and slept clothed and huddled beneath a pile of cloaks and furs, grateful for each other ' s warmth . It made Jon remember cold nights long ago at Winterfell, when he ' d shared a bed with his brothers . These men were brothers too, though the bed they shared was stone and earth.They found Dolorous Edd frying a rasher of bacon and boiling a dozen eggs in a kettle over the Old Bear ' s cookfire . Mormont sat in his wood-and-leather camp chair . I had begun to fear for you . Did you meet with trouble?I warned you he was false . Varamyr ' s tone was mild, but his shadow-cat was staring at Jon hungrily through slitted grey eyes . I never did like the smell o ' him.Some say it was for a crown . Some say for a woman . Others that you had the wildling blood.We ' ve packed in our own supplies, my lord, said the Old Bear . We should be pleased to share our food and wine.For a wench, some say . For a crown, others would have it . Qhorin tested the edge of his sword with the ball of his thumb . He liked women, Mance did, and he was not a man whose knees bent easily, that ' s true . But it was more than that . He loved the wild better than the Wall . It was in his blood . He was wildling born, taken as a child when some raiders were put to the sword . When he left the Shadow Tower he was only going home again.I ' ve not seen Benjen Stark for three years, he was telling Mormont . And if truth be told, I never once missed him . A half-dozen black puppies and the odd pig or two skulked among the benches, while women in ragged deerskins passed horns of beer, stirred the fire, and chopped carrots and onions into a kettle.Keep quiet, all of you, Halder said . I thought I heard something.Ygritte . Her hand rubbed at her throat and came away bloody . She stared at the wetness.It was Chett who answered Jon ' s knock . Jon told him . [BOS] I need to speak to Maester Aemon, [EOS] But even through the blowing snow, the shape of the great white hill that loomed above the trees was unmistakable . The Fist of the First Men . Jon heard the scream of the eagle overhead . A raven looked down from a soldier pine and quorked as he went past . Had the Old Bear made his attack? Instead of the clash of steel and the thrum of arrows taking flight, Jon heard only the soft crunch of frozen crust beneath his garron ' s hooves.Might be after we could come back here, and live in that tower, she said . Would you want that, Jon Snow? After?A long silence . Then: Yes . And Yes, the raven muttered, strutting . Yes, yes, yes.I had hoped for some word of my father.And he was finding that he had a man ' s thirst, to the raucous delight of the youths around him, who urged him on every time he drained a glass . They were fine company, and Jon relished the stories they were telling, tales of battle and bedding and the hunt . He was certain that his companions were more entertaining than the king ' s offspring . He had sated his curiosity about the visitors when they made their entrance . The procession had passed not a foot from the place he had been given on the bench, and Jon had gotten a good long look at them all.One more step, thought Jon . Another foot . He moved his hand closer to Longclaw ' s hilt . If I hold my tongue . . .Harma snorted, her disdain frosting from her nostrils . What fools these black crows be.save our sons from war, we pray,You must not balk, whatever is asked of you . Ride with them, eat with them, fight with them . . . But this old man had offered no resistance . He had been unlucky, that was all . Who he was, where he came from, where he meant to go on his sorry sway-backed horse . . . none of it mattered.Not at your hands . Mance studied Jon ' s face . You saw the Fist of the First Men . You know what happened there . You know what we are facing.Jon said . [BOS] I ' ll take that wager, Ser Alliser, I ' d love to see Ghost juggle . [EOS] Maester Aemon gave Jon ' s crude bandage a sniff when Clydas cut it away . We?I did say it, for I was.Robb was in the middle of it, shouting commands with the best of them . He seemed to have grown of late, as if Bran ' s fall and his mother ' s collapse had somehow made him stronger . Grey Wind was at his side.Jon wheeled around to face them, drawing his sword . [BOS] Get back . I don ' t wish to hurt you, but I will if I have to . [EOS] When the cage jerked to a halt, Jon swung down onto the ground and rattled Longclaw ' s hilt to loosen the bastard blade in its scabbard . The gate was a few yards to his left, still blocked by the splintered ruins of the turtle, the carcass of a mammoth ripening within . There were other corpses too, strewn amidst broken barrels, hardened pitch, and patches of burnt grass, all shadowed by the Wall . Jon had no wish to linger here . He started walking toward the wildling camp, past the body of a dead giant whose head had been crushed by a stone . A raven was pulling out bits of brain from the giant ' s shattered skull . It looked up as he walked by . Snow, it screamed at him . Snow, snow . Then it opened its wings and flew away.Every morning they had trained together, since they were big enough to walk; Snow and Stark, spinning and slashing about the wards of Winterfell, shouting and laughing, sometimes crying when there was no one else to see . They were not little boys when they fought, but knights and mighty heroes . I ' m Prince Aemon the Dragonknight, Jon would call out, and Robb would shout back, Well, I ' m Florian the Fool . Or Robb would say, I ' m the Young Dragon, and Jon would reply, I ' m Ser Ryam Redwyne.What color are their eyes? he asked her.If I could fly, I ' d be back at Castle Black eating a pork pie, said Sam.Two men went through each house, to make certain nothing was missed . Jon was paired with dour Eddison Tollett, a squire grey of hair and thin as a pike, whom the other brothers called Dolorous Edd . Bad enough when the dead come walking, he said to Jon as they crossed the village, now the Old Bear wants them talking as well? No good will come of that, I ' ll warrant . And who ' s to say the bones wouldn ' t lie? Why should death make a man truthful, or even clever? The dead are likely dull fellows, full of tedious complaints—the ground ' s too cold, my gravestone should be larger, why does he get more worms than I do . . .These are a free folk indeed, Jon saw . Rattleshirt might lead them, but none of them were shy in talking back to him.Jon said . [BOS] Old enough to treat visitors with more courtesy than you, Give him my pardons . I would not disturb his rest if it were not important . [EOS] Thoren Smallwood, a sinewy ranger with a weak chin and a weaker mouth hidden under a thin scraggle of beard, gave Jon and Sam a cool look . He had been one of Alliser Thorne ' s henchmen, and had no love for either of them . The Lord Commander ' s place is at Castle Black, lording and commanding, he told Mormont, ignoring the newcomers, it seems to me.Jon ' s breath misted the air . If I lie to him, he ' ll know . He looked Mance Rayder in the eyes, opened and closed his burned hand . [BOS] I wear the cloak you gave me, Your Grace . [EOS] Jon gathered up the empty cups and stepped outside . He heard distant laughter, the plaintive sound of pipes . A great blaze was crackling in the center of the camp, and he could smell stew cooking . The Old Bear might not be hungry, but Jon was . He drifted over toward the fire . [BOS] Sleep well, my lord . [EOS] I told you to sit, Mormont grumbled . Sit, the raven screamed . And have a drink, damn you . That ' s a command, Snow.Get him up . Rough hands dragged him to his feet . Jon did not resist . Do you have a name?Jon was hungry too, so he fell in beside Lannister and slowed his pace to match the dwarf ' s awkward, waddling steps . The wind was rising, and they could hear the old wooden buildings creaking around them, and in the distance a heavy shutter banging, over and over, forgotten . Once there was a muffled thump as a blanket of snow slid from a roof and landed near them.He sniffed at the bark, smelled wolf and tree and boy, but behind that there were other scents, the rich brown smell of warm earth and the hard grey smell of stone and something else, something terrible . Death, he knew . He was smelling death . He cringed back, his hair bristling, and bared his fangs.The words hurt, even now . It had been so long, it seemed folly to cling to the hope that Ben Stark was still alive, but Jon Snow was nothing if not stubborn.Everyone laughed but Grenn . I hope I ' m a ranger.There was no question of riding double . Stonesnake offered to lay in wait for the pursuit and surprise them when they came . Perhaps he could take a few of them with him down to hell . Qhorin refused . If any man in the Night ' s Watch can make it through the Frostfangs alone and afoot, it is you, brother . You can go over mountains that a horse must go around . Make for the Fist . Tell Mormont what Jon saw, and how . Tell him that the old powers are waking, that he faces giants and wargs and worse . Tell him that the trees have eyes again.A scarred hand is nothing . On the Wall, you ' ll be wearing gloves often as not.If you say so . Jon was doubtful . Treasure meant gold, silver, and jewels, not dust, spiders, and rotting leather.Something worse than we can imagine, suggested Dolorous Edd . Well, I might be able to imagine it, but I ' d sooner not . Bad enough to know you ' re going to come to some awful end without thinking about it aforetime.My mother always said rain was good for growing crops, Grenn put in hopefully.A year ago Robert was king, and the realm was at peace, declared Jarman Buckwell, the square stolid man who commanded the scouts . Much can change in a year ' s time.Beneath the Wall, the queen ' s men were kindling their nightfire . He saw Melisandre emerge from the tunnel with the king beside her, to lead the prayers she believed would keep the dark away . Jon told the wolf . [BOS] Come, Ghost, With me . You ' re hungry, I know . I could feel it . [EOS] They ran together for the gate, circling wide around the nightfire, where reaching flames clawed at the black belly of the night.Die! the raven cried.Then you saw us all . Prince Joffrey and Prince Tommen, Princess Myrcella, my brothers Robb and Bran and Rickon, my sisters Arya and Sansa . You saw them walk the center aisle with every eye upon them and take their seats at the table just below the dais where the king and queen were seated.Jon was in no mood for anyone ' s counsel . [BOS] What do you know about being a bastard? [EOS] I chain him up in the old stables when we ' re training . They board all the horses in the east stables now, so no one bothers him . The rest of the time he stays with me . My sleeping cell is in Hardin ' s Tower.Lord Janos started sputtering again . This, this is an outrage . We ought to hang this boy . Yes! Hang him, I say, hang him for a turncloak and a warg, along with his friend Mance Rayder . Lord Commander? I will not have it, I will not suffer it!When they finally spied Castle Black, its timbered keeps and stone towers looked like nothing more than a handful of toy blocks scattered on the snow, beneath the vast wall of ice . The ancient stronghold of the black brothers was no Winterfell, no true castle at all . Lacking walls, it could not be defended, not from the south, or east, or west; but it was only the north that concerned the Night ' s Watch, and to the north loomed the Wall . Almost seven hundred feet high it stood, three times the height of the tallest tower in the stronghold it sheltered . His uncle said the top was wide enough for a dozen armored knights to ride abreast . The gaunt outlines of huge catapults and monstrous wooden cranes stood sentry up there, like the skeletons of great birds, and among them walked men in black as small as ants.The scream brought Val out of the tent, white-faced . What is it, what ' s happened? Varamyr ' s wolves were fighting each other, and the shadowcat had raced off into the trees, but the man was still twisting on the ground . What ' s wrong with him? Val demanded, horrified . Where ' s Mance?Dareon gave him a look . The stewards are fine for the likes of you and me, Sam, but not for Lord Snow.Beside the brazier, a short but immensely broad man sat on a stool, eating a hen off a skewer . Hot grease was running down his chin and into his snow-white beard, but he smiled happily all the same . Thick gold bands graven with runes bound his massive arms, and he wore a heavy shirt of black ringmail that could only have come from a dead ranger . A few feet away, a taller, leaner man in a leather shirt sewn with bronze scales stood frowning over a map, a two-handed greatsword slung across his back in a leather sheath . He was straight as a spear, all long wiry muscle, clean-shaved, bald, with a strong straight nose and deepset grey eyes . He might even have been comely if he ' d had ears, but he had lost both along the way, whether to frostbite or some enemy ' s knife Jon could not tell . Their lack made the man ' s head seem narrow and pointed.I will . They broke apart and looked at each other awkwardly . Uncle Benjen said to send you to the stables if I saw you, Robb finally said.Yet under the frail cage of those shattered ribs, his chest rose and fell with each shallow breath.Mormont beckoned him closer . Send him here after he ' s eaten . Have him bring quill and parchment . And find Tollett as well . Tell him to bring my axe . A guest gift for our host.Jon had to laugh . [BOS] Craster ' s one man . We ' re two hundred . I doubt he ' ll murder anyone . [EOS] Lord Brandon had no other children . At his behest, the black crows flew forth from their castles in the hundreds, but nowhere could they find any sign o ' Bael or this maid . For most a year they searched, till the lord lost heart and took to his bed, and it seemed as though the line o ' Starks was at its end . But one night as he lay waiting to die, Lord Brandon heard a child ' s cry . He followed the sound and found his daughter back in her bedchamber, asleep with a babe at her breast.Jon drew Longsclaw . [BOS] Get away from us, unless you want what Qhorin got . [EOS] He almost rode through Mole ' s Town, so feverish that he did not know where he was . Most of the village was hidden underground, only a handful of small hovels to be seen by the light of the waning moon . The brothel was a shed no bigger than a privy, its red lantern creaking in the wind, a bloodshot eye peering through the blackness . Jon dismounted at the adjoining stable, half-stumbling from the mare ' s back as he shouted two boys awake . I need a fresh mount, with saddle and bridle, he told them, in a tone that brooked no argument . They brought him that; a skin of wine as well, and half a loaf of brown bread . Wake the village, he told them . Warn them . There are wildlings south of the Wall . Gather your goods and make for Castle Black . He pulled himself onto the black gelding they ' d given him, gritting his teeth at the pain in his leg, and rode hard for the north.Part of him wanted only to flee, but he knew that if he did he might never see Bran again . He took a nervous step into the room . Please, he said.Jon said . [BOS] I don ' t care, I don ' t care about them and I don ' t care about you or Thorne or Benjen Stark or any of it . I hate it here . It ' s too … it ' s cold . [EOS] Jon said . [BOS] At what? [EOS] He ' s of my village . You know nothing, Jon Snow . A true man steals a woman from afar, t ' strengthen the clan . Women who bed brothers or fathers or clan kin offend the gods, and are cursed with weak and sickly children . Even monsters.You can call him Lord Snow, Pyp said as he came up to join them . You don ' t want to know what his mother calls him.That will be all, Thorne told them . I can only stomach so much ineptitude in any one day . If the Others ever come for us, I pray they have archers, because you lot are fit for nothing more than arrow fodder.Your rangers will limit their ranging to this side of the river until the Halfhand reaches us . After that, we ' ll see . I will not lose more of my men.The yard had grown deathly quiet . Jon could feel Ser Alliser ' s eyes . Why are you waiting? he asked Rast and the others in a voice gone deceptively soft, but it was Jon who moved first . Halder barely got his sword up in time.And then Qhorin ' s sword was coming at him and somehow Longclaw leapt upward to block . The force of impact almost knocked the bastard blade from Jon ' s hand, and sent him staggering backward . You must not balk, whatever is asked of you . He shifted to a two-hand grip, quick enough to deliver a stroke of his own, but the big ranger brushed it aside with contemptuous ease . Back and forth they went, black cloaks swirling, the youth ' s quickness against the savage strength of Qhorin ' s left-hand cuts . The Halfhand ' s longsword seemed to be everywhere at once, raining down from one side and then the other, driving him where he would, keeping him off balance . Already he could feel his arms growing numb.The day promised to be damp and cold, and damper and colder by the Wall, beneath those tons of ice . The closer they got, the more the Thenns held back . They have never seen the Wall before, not even the Magnar, Jon realized . It frightens them . In the Seven Kingdoms it was said that the Wall marked the end of the world . That is true for them as well . It was all in where you stood.When Jon had been Bran ' s age, he had dreamed of doing great deeds, as boys always did . The details of his feats changed with every dreaming, but quite often he imagined saving his father ' s life . Afterward Lord Eddard would declare that Jon had proved himself a true Stark, and place Ice in his hand . Even then he had known it was only a child ' s folly; no bastard could ever hope to wield a father ' s sword . Even the memory shamed him . What kind of man stole his own brother ' s birthright? I have no right to this, he thought, no more than to Ice . He twitched his burned fingers, feeling a throb of pain deep under the skin . My lord, you honor me, but—That was for the good, at least . The one-armed armorer was hard headed, tough, and well seasoned in war . Ser Wynton Stout, on the other hand . . . well, he had been a good man once, everyone agreed, but he had been eighty years a ranger, and both strength and wits were gone . Once he ' d fallen asleep at supper and almost drowned in a bowl of pea soup.Gut him . That was Rattleshirt, still ahorse . The eagle flew to him and perched atop his bony helm, screeching.Rattleshirt took off his yellowed helm as he waited for the song to end . Beneath his bone-and-leather armor he was a small man, and the face under the giant ' s skull was ordinary, with a knobby chin, thin mustache, and sallow, pinched cheeks . His eyes were close-set, one eyebrow creeping all the way across his forehead, dark hair thinning back from a sharp widow ' s peak.Of the ride back, Jon Snow remembered little . It seemed shorter than the journey south, perhaps because his mind was elsewhere . Pyp set the pace, galloping, walking, trotting, and then breaking into another gallop . Mole ' s Town came and went, the red lantern over the brothel long extinguished . They made good time . Dawn was still an hour off when Jon glimpsed the towers of Castle Black ahead of them, dark against the pale immensity of the Wall . It did not seem like home this time.Septon Cellador cleared his throat . Lord Slynt, he said, this boy refused to swear his vows properly in the sept, but went beyond the Wall to say his words before a heart tree . His father ' s gods, he said, but they are wildling gods as well.The Milkwater flows from a great lake at the foot of a glacier, Stonesnake put in.Jon said fervently . [BOS] I have to, [EOS] He is not my father . The thought leapt unbidden to Jon ' s mind . Lord Eddard Stark is my father . I will not forget him, no matter how many swords they give me . Yet he could scarcely tell Lord Mormont that it was another man ' s sword he dreamt of …I will not father a bastard.If the Magnar takes Castle Black unawares, it will be red slaughter, boys butchered in their beds before they know they are under attack . Jon had to warn them, but how? He was never sent out to forage or hunt, nor allowed to stand a watch alone . And he feared for Ygritte as well . He could not take her, but if he left her, would the Magnar make her answer for his treachery? Two hearts that beat as one . . .We ' ll go back to the cave, he said . You ' re not going to die, Ygritte . You ' re not.There were cookfires all along the river, amongst wayns and carts and sleds . Many of the wildlings had thrown up tents, of hide and skin and felted wool . Others sheltered behind rocks in crude lean-tos, or slept beneath their wagons . At one fire Jon saw a man hardening the points of long wooden spears and tossing them in a pile . Elsewhere two bearded youths in boiled leather were sparring with staffs, leaping at each other over the flames, grunting each time one landed a blow . A dozen women sat nearby in a circle, fletching arrows.Are all crows so curious? asked Tormund . Well, here ' s a tale for you . It were another winter, colder even than the one I spent inside that giant, and snowing day and night, snowflakes as big as your head, not these little things . It snowed so hard the whole village was half buried . I was in me Ruddy Hall, with only a cask o ' mead to keep me company and nothing to do but drink it . The more I drank the more I got to thinking about this woman lived close by, a fine strong woman with the biggest pair of teats you ever saw . She had a temper on her, that one, but oh, she could be warm too, and in the deep of winter a man needs his warmth.Rayder ' s eyes met Jon ' s again . Was it only the five of you? Or are more of your brothers skulking about?He gave her closest nipple a playful pinch . I was a man of the Night ' s Watch . Was, he heard himself say . What was he now? He did not want to look at that . Were you a maid?It ' s cold . Satin stood with his hands tucked into his armpits under his cloak . His cheeks were bright red.Jon said . [BOS] A direwolf, His name is Ghost . The direwolf is the sigil of my father ' s House . [EOS] A silence fell over the wood . For a moment all they heard was Sam ' s heavy breathing and the wet sound of Dywen sucking on his teeth . Jon squatted beside Ghost.Even before Jon stood and shook it out, he knew what he had: the black cloak of a Sworn Brother of the Night ' s Watch.Jon did not remember standing or leaving the solar . The next he knew, he was descending the tower steps, thinking, This is my father, my sisters, how can it be none of my concern.It ' s as heavy as it needs to be to stop a sword, Jon said . Now get it up . He stepped forward, slashing . Satin jerked the shield up in time to catch the sword on its rim, and swung his own blade at Jon ' s ribs . Good, Jon said, when he felt the impact on his own shield . That was good . But you need to put your body into it . Get your weight behind the steel and you ' ll do more damage than with arm strength alone . Come, try it again, drive at me, but keep the shield up or I ' ll ring your head like a bell . . .It ' s big, Horse said.Be gentle . Sam came around the table and took the scroll from his hand, holding it as if it were a wounded animal . The important books used to be copied over when they needed them . Some of the oldest have been copied half a hundred times, probably.Frightened away by something, no doubt, Dywen said.Jon laughed, laughed like a drunk or a madman, and his men laughed with him . The chariots and the racing horsemen on the flanks were well ahead of the center now, he saw . The wildlings had not crossed a third of the half mile, yet their battle line was dissolving . Load the trebuchet with caltrops, Jon said . Owen, Kegs, angle the catapults toward the center . Scorpions, load with fire spears and loose at my command . He pointed at the Mole ' s Town boys . You, you, and you, stand by with torches.Jon laughed, half amazed that he still remembered how . [BOS] You ' re all a bunch of mad fools, do you know that? [EOS] The good woman at the brazier, Mance Rayder went on, is Dalla . The pregnant woman smiled shyly . Treat her like you would any queen, she is carrying my child . He turned to the last two . This beauty is her sister Val . Young Jarl beside her is her latest pet.I gave you my name.Is it Mance Rayder? Satin asked anxiously.It did, once . Longclaw, it was called.The eagle was perched on a spine of rock far above them, outlined against the darkening sky . We ' ve seen other eagles, Jon thought . That need not be the one I dreamed of.Jon found parchment, quill, and ink in his saddlebag and brought them to the Lord Commander . At Whitetree, Mormont scrawled . The fourth village . All empty . The wildlings are gone . Find Tarly and see that he gets this on its way, he said as he handed Jon the message . When he whistled, his raven came flapping down to land on his horse ' s head . Corn, the raven suggested, bobbing . The horse whickered.When the silence had stretched unbearably long and the men knew at last that the horn would not wind again, they grinned at one another sheepishly, as if to deny that they had been anxious . Jon Snow fed a few sticks to the fire, buckled on his swordbelt, pulled on his boots, shook the dirt and dew from the cloak, and fastened it around his shoulders . The flames blazed up beside him, welcome heat beating against his face as he dressed . He could hear the Lord Commander moving inside the tent . After a moment Mormont lifted the flap . One blast? On his shoulder, his raven sat fluffed and silent, looking miserable.Rattleshirt, Qhorin called down, icy-polite.Blind he may be, but Aemon knows what he ' s about . I pray the gods let us keep him another twenty years . Do you know that he might have been king?Yes? Mormont growled impatiently . Blood, what of it?Jon had the logs crackling merrily by the time Chett led in Maester Aemon . The old man was clad in his bed robe, but around his throat was the chain collar of his order . A maester did not remove it even to sleep . [BOS] The chair beside the fire would be pleasant, [EOS] he said when he felt the warmth on his face . When he was settled comfortably, Chett covered his legs with a fur and went to stand by the door.Good Queen Alysanne, they called her later . One of the castles on the Wall was named for her as well . Queensgate . Before her visit they called it Snowgate.and he smiled and he laughed and he sung,Still, he prayed his father ' s gods might spare him that bleak task . The host moved but slowly, burdened as it was by all the wildlings ' herds and children and mean little treasures, and the snows had slowed its progress even more . Most of the column was out of the foothills now, oozing down along the west bank of the Milkwater like honey on a cold winter ' s morning, following the course of the river into the heart of the haunted forest.The Old Bear ' s not like to give you a choice.Samwell Tarly looked at him for a long moment, and his round face seemed to cave in on itself . He sat down on the frost-covered ground and began to cry, huge choking sobs that made his whole body shake . Jon Snow could only stand and watch . Like the snowfall on the barrowlands, it seemed the tears would never end.I . . . I know that . What could he say?An inventory, Sam said, or perhaps a bill of sale.It seemed to sprout from solid rock, its pale roots twisting up from a myriad of fissures and hairline cracks . The tree was slender compared to other weirwoods he had seen, no more than a sapling, yet it was growing as he watched, its limbs thickening as they reached for the sky . Wary, he circled the smooth white trunk until he came to the face . Red eyes looked at him . Fierce eyes they were, yet glad to see him . The weirwood had his brother ' s face . Had his brother always had three eyes?Jon said . He knelt and called out . [BOS] He ' s not scared, Ghost, come here . Come on . That ' s it . [EOS] Qhorin Halfhand looked at him . Jon could hear the wind keening as it shivered through the high pass above them . One of the garrons whickered and pawed at the thin stony soil of the hollow where they had taken shelter . The wolf will remain with us, Qhorin said . White fur is seen too easily by moonlight . He turned to Stonesnake . When it ' s done, throw down a burning brand . We ' ll come when we see it fall.Nor live, I hope, Mormont said, cutting his ham with a dagger and feeding a bite to the bird . You have not deserted—yet . Here you stand . If we beheaded every boy who rode to Mole ' s Town in the night, only ghosts would guard the Wall . Yet maybe you mean to flee again on the morrow, or a fortnight from now . Is that it? Is that your hope, boy?And the cost?The same things I ' d have of all of them, lad . Men, horses, swords, armor, grain, cheese, wine, wool, nails . . . the Night ' s Watch is not proud, we take what is offered . His fingers drummed against the rough-hewn planks of the table . If the winds have been kind, Ser Alliser should reach King ' s Landing by the turn of the moon, but whether this boy Joffrey will pay him any heed, I do not know . House Lannister has never been a friend to the Watch.The Skirling Pass was really a series of passes, a long twisting course that went up around a succession of icy wind-carved peaks and down through hidden valleys that seldom saw the sun . Apart from his companions, Jon had glimpsed no living man since they ' d left the wood behind and begun to make their way upward . The Frostfangs were as cruel as any place the gods had made, and as inimical to men . The wind cut like a knife up here, and shrilled in the night like a mother mourning her slain children . What few trees they saw were stunted, grotesque things growing sideways out of cracks and fissures . Tumbled shelves of rock often overhung the trail, fringed with hanging icicles that looked like long white teeth from a distance.You knew?Jon shrugged . [BOS] No . [EOS] He scattered more meat . The fingers of his left hand were slimy with blood, and his right throbbed from the weight of the bucket.Did he? Mormont did not seem pleased . Craster said much and more last night, and confirmed enough of my fears to condemn me to a sleepless night on his floor . Mance Rayder is gathering his people together in the Frostfangs . That ' s why the villages are empty . It is the same tale that Ser Denys Mallister had from the wildling his men captured in the Gorge, but Craster has added the where, and that makes all the difference.Me . The ranger they called Stonesnake had already shown that he was the best climber among them . It would have to be him.I am.Ghost . I had to leave him when I climbed the Wall . I ' d hoped he ' d make his way back here.You do . I want you rested . Go on, I ' m not going to let you sleep through the fight . He made himself smile . You ' re the only one who can move those bloody barrels.Show them, commanded Rattleshirt.The Wall was too big to be stormed by any conventional means; too high for ladders or siege towers, too thick for battering rams . No catapult could throw a stone large enough to breach it, and if you tried to set it on fire, the icemelt would quench the flames . You could climb over, as the raiders did near Greyguard, but only if you were strong and fit and sure-handed, and even then you might end up like Jarl, impaled on a tree . They must take the gate, or they cannot pass.and its kiss was a terrible thing.Jon said, as much to himself as to the others . Their only hope was to try and crush the turtle when it reached the Wall . For that, they needed boulders . No matter how stoutly built the turtle was, a huge chunk of rock crashing straight down on top of it from seven hundred feet was bound to do some damage . [BOS] The hides won ' t burn, Grenn, Owen, Kegs, it ' s time . [EOS] They feel it too . I ' d best see to the Old Bear, he said . He gets noisy when he isn ' t fed as well.Jon plucked a scroll from a bin, blew off the worst of the dust . A corner flaked off between his fingers as he unrolled it . [BOS] Mormont wanted those maps a little sooner than that . Look, this one is crumbling, [EOS] he said, frowning over the faded script.So Jon Snow took the wineskin from his hand and had a swallow . But only one . The Wall was his, the night was dark, and he had a king to face.He walked towards the water, and discovered an almost dry spot beneath the leaning daub-and-wattle wall of a tumbledown cottage that had mostly tumbled down . That was where Ygritte found him sitting, staring off across the rain-whipped lake . I know this place, he told her when she sat beside him . That tower . . . look at the top of it the next time the lightning flashes, and tell me what you see.An old man sitting by a fire?Har . Tormund spat . Well, I stepped in that! He grinned at Jon . See, lad, that ' s why he ' s king and I ' m not . I can outdrink, outfight, and outsing him, and my member ' s thrice the size o ' his, but Mance has cunning . He was raised a crow, you know, and the crow ' s a tricksy bird.We ' re not to talk to you, the girl remembered suddenly.Matthar had circled behind him . He joined the chorus . I pledge my life and honor to the Night ' s Watch.Might be we won ' t give him one, said Chett.Over the Wall . It ' s past time you proved your faith with something more than words, Jon Snow.Once, the old man said . Once . So you see, Jon, I do know … and knowing, I will not tell you stay or go . You must make that choice yourself, and live with it all the rest of your days . As I have . His voice fell to a whisper . As I have …Face reddening, Jon descended the slope to where Rattleshirt sat his horse . The wildling stared at him through the eyeholes of his helm, and said, The free folk have no need of cravens.Whatever demonic force moved Othor had been driven out by the flames; the twisted thing they had found in the ashes had been no more than cooked meat and charred bone . Yet in his nightmare he faced it again … and this time the burning corpse wore Lord Eddard ' s features . It was his father ' s skin that burst and blackened, his father ' s eyes that ran liquid down his cheeks like jellied tears . Jon did not understand why that should be or what it might mean, but it frightened him more than he could say.I know . Jon had dragged himself to the common hall to sup with his friends, and the failure of the rangers ' search had been all the men had been talking of.Three hundred, thought Jon, against the fury of the wild . His fingers opened and closed.The Wall will stop them, Jon heard himself say . He turned and said it again, louder . The Wall will stop them . The Wall defends itself . Hollow words, but he needed to say them, almost as much as his brothers needed to hear them . Mance wants to unman us with his numbers . Does he think we ' re stupid? He was shouting now, his leg forgotten, and every man was listening . The chariots, the horsemen, all those fools on foot . . . what are they going to do to us up here? Any of you ever see a mammoth climb a wall? He laughed, and Pyp and Owen and half a dozen more laughed with him . They ' re nothing, they ' re less use than our straw brothers here, they can ' t reach us, they can ' t hurt us, and they don ' t frighten us, do they?That sounds more like me, said Tormund . Well met, Jon Snow . I am fond o ' wargs, as it happens, though not o ' Starks.Jon had never liked Theon Greyjoy, but he had been their father ' s ward . Another spasm of pain twisted up his leg, and the next he knew he was flat on his back again . There ' s some mistake, he insisted . At Queenscrown I saw a direwolf, a grey direwolf . . . grey . . . it knew me . If Bran was dead, could some part of him live on in his wolf, as Orell lived within his eagle?The Watch has need of every man it can get, Donal Noye said when they were alone . Even men like Toad . You won ' t win any honors killing him.Afterward it would seem to Jon Snow as if he ' d dreamt that night . Side by side with the straw soldiers, with longbows or crossbows clutched in half-frozen hands, his archers launched a hundred flights of arrows against men they never saw . From time to time a wildling arrow came flying back in answer . He sent men to the smaller catapults and filled the air with jagged rocks the size of a giant ' s fist, but the darkness swallowed them as a man might swallow a handful of nuts . Mammoths trumpeted in the gloom, strange voices called out in stranger tongues, and Septon Cellador prayed so loudly and drunkenly for the dawn to come that Jon was tempted to chuck him over the edge himself . They heard a mammoth dying at their feet and saw another lurch burning through the woods, trampling down men and trees alike . The wind blew cold and colder . Hobb rode up the chain with cups of onion broth, and Owen and Clydas served them to the archers where they stood, so they could gulp them down between arrows . Zei took a place among them with her crossbow . Hours of repeated jars and shocks knocked something loose on the right-hand trebuchet, and its counterweight came crashing free, suddenly and catastrophically, wrenching the throwing arm sideways with a splintering crash . The left-hand trebuchet kept throwing, but the wildlings had quickly learned to shun the place where its loads were landing.Sam ' s fat face blushed a deep red . On the way home . He could not meet Jon ' s eyes . She ' s going to have a baby.Your Grace? The king smiled . That ' s not a style one often hears from the lips of free folk . I ' m Mance to most, The Mance to some . Will you take a horn of mead?The corpse lurched forward . There was no blood . One-armed, face cut near in half, it seemed to feel nothing . Jon held the longsword before him . Stay away! he commanded, his voice gone shrill . Corn, screamed the raven, corn, corn . The severed arm was wriggling out of its torn sleeve, a pale snake with a black five-fingered head . Ghost pounced and got it between his teeth . Finger bones crunched . Jon hacked at the corpse ' s neck, felt the steel bite deep and hard.Does this mean my dreams are true as well? asked Squire Dalbridge . Lord Snow can keep his mammoths, I want my women.The maester nodded . I did indeed . Clydas, give Jon the bucket . Perhaps he will be kind enough to assist me . The hunched, pink-eyed brother handed Jon the bucket and scurried down the ladder . Toss the meat into the cages, Aemon instructed him . The birds will do the rest.No . Not enough . Never enough . Jon let his sword drop . I ' m sorry, he muttered . Emmett, are you hurt?Arya was in her room, packing a polished ironwood chest that was bigger than she was . Nymeria was helping . Arya would only have to point, and the wolf would bound across the room, snatch up some wisp of silk in her jaws, and fetch it back . But when she smelled Ghost, she sat down on her haunches and yelped at them.They had moved him back to his old cell in tumbledown Hardin ' s Tower after the fire, and it was there he returned . Ghost was curled up asleep beside the door, but he lifted his head at the sound of Jon ' s boots . The direwolf ' s red eyes were darker than garnets and wiser than men . Jon knelt, scratched his ear, and showed him the pommel of the sword . Look . It ' s you.There was a sheepfold, but no sheep.Dywen whapped him up alongside his ear with the back of his hand . You? Seen? You ' re blind as Maester Aemon . You never even saw that bear.Aye, a good crop of mildew, Dywen said . The best thing about a rain like this, it saves a man from taking baths . He made a clacking sound on his wooden teeth.Jon was not amused . [BOS] You ' re scaring her . [EOS] Iron Emmett pulled his battered helm off . Was there some part of yield you could not comprehend, Lord Snow? It was said amiably, though . Emmett was an amiable man, and he loved the song of swords . Warrior defend me, he groaned, now I know how Qhorin Halfhand must have felt.Dareon, I am told that you sang at many a high lord ' s table and shared their meat and mead . We are sending you to Eastwatch . It may be your palate will be some help to Cotter Pyke when merchant galleys come trading . We are paying too dear for salt beef and pickled fish, and the quality of the olive oil we ' re getting has been frightful . Present yourself to Borcas when you arrive, he will keep you busy between ships.. . . he ' s dead? Mormont asked, not unkindly.in stone halls they forge their sharp spears.Not until he was well beyond the village did Jon slow again . By then both he and the mare were damp with sweat . He dismounted, shivering, his burned hand aching . A bank of melting snow lay under the trees, bright in the moonlight, water trickling off to form small shallow pools . Jon squatted and brought his hands together, cupping the runoff between his fingers . The snowmelt was icy cold . He drank, and splashed some on his face, until his cheeks tingled . His fingers were throbbing worse than they had in days, and his head was pounding too . I am doing the right thing, he told himself, so why do I feel so bad?Nor me . There was anger in that admission, and bitterness too deep for words . Raymun Redbeard, Bael the Bard, Gendel and Gorne, the Horned Lord, they all came south to conquer, but I ' ve come with my tail between my legs to hide behind your Wall . He touched the horn again . If I sound the Horn of Winter, the Wall will fall . Or so the songs would have me believe . There are those among my people who want nothing more . . .Grenn scowled . You ' re uglier than me . At least I don ' t have ears like a bat.The Night ' s Watch is my House now, Sam said . The Seven have never answered my prayers . Perhaps the old gods will.Noye frowned . Scarred or smooth, it ' s a face I thought I ' d seen the last of . We heard you ' d gone over to Mance Raydar.Rattleshirt ' s bone armor clattered loudly as he laughed . Then kill the Halfhand, bastard.Arya gave him a whap on the arm with the flat of her blade . The blow stung, but Jon found himself grinning like an idiot . I know which end to use, Arya said . A doubtful look crossed her face . Septa Mordane will take it away from me.Inside, the hall was immense and drafty, even with a fire roaring in its great hearth . Crows nested in the timbers of its lofty ceiling . Jon heard their cries overhead as he accepted a bowl of stew and a heel of black bread from the day ' s cooks . Grenn and Toad and some of the others were seated at the bench nearest the warmth, laughing and cursing each other in rough voices . Jon eyed them thoughtfully for a moment . Then he chose a spot at the far end of the hall, well away from the other diners.Aye, Ygritte agreed . It always is.It was the biggest tree Jon Snow had ever seen, the trunk near eight feet wide, the branches spreading so far that the entire village was shaded beneath their canopy . The size did not disturb him so much as the face . . . the mouth especially, no simple carved slash, but a jagged hollow large enough to swallow a sheep.I ' m First Ranger now, with Ben Stark lost and Ser Jaremy killed, Smallwood said stubbornly . The command should be mine.Suddenly he heard the shriek of Mormont ' s raven . Corn, the bird was screaming . Corn, corn, corn, corn, corn, corn . Ghost bounded ahead, and Jon came scrambling after . The door to Mormont ' s solar was wide open . The direwolf plunged through . Jon stopped in the doorway, blade in hand, giving his eyes a moment to adjust . Heavy drapes had been pulled across the windows, and the darkness was black as ink . Who ' s there? he called out.I would not . Grenn sounded peeved . I ' d just ride south, you can tell south by the stars.His guard was sprawled bonelessly across the narrow steps, looking up at him . Looking up at him, even though he was lying on his stomach . His head had been twisted completely around.All night they rode, feeling their way up the twisting pass and through the stretches of broken ground . The wind grew stronger . Sometimes it was so dark that they dismounted and went ahead on foot, each man leading his garron . Once Ebben suggested that some torches might serve them well, but Qhorin said, No fire, and that was the end of that . They reached the stone bridge at the summit and began to descend again . Off in the darkness a shadowcat screamed in fury, its voice bouncing off the rocks so it seemed as though a dozen other ' cats were giving answer . Once Jon thought he saw a pair of glowing eyes on a ledge overhead, as big as harvest moons.A wind-carved arch of grey stone marked the highest point of the pass . Here the way broadened as it began its long descent toward the valley of the Milkwater . Qhorin decreed that they would rest here until the shadows began to grow again . Shadows are friends to men in black, he said.The wind was blowing wet and heavy as they crossed the valley of the Milkwater and rode singlefile through the river camp . Ghost kept close to Jon, but the scent of him went before them like a herald, and soon there were wildling dogs all around them, growling and barking . Lenyl screamed at them to be quiet, but they paid him no heed . They don ' t much care for that beast o ' yours, Longspear Ryk said to Jon.Mance, Rattleshirt said, I want me some crow bones.Thorne strode toward him, crisp black leathers whispering faintly as he moved . He was a compact man of fifty years, spare and hard, with grey in his black hair and eyes like chips of onyx . The truth now, he commanded.In Old Nan ' s stories, giants were outsized men who lived in colossal castles, fought with huge swords, and walked about in boots a boy could hide in . These were something else, more bearlike than human, and as wooly as the mammoths they rode . Seated, it was hard to say how big they truly were . Ten feet tall maybe, or twelve, Jon thought . Maybe fourteen, but no taller . Their sloping chests might have passed for those of men, but their arms hung down too far, and their lower torsos looked half again as wide as their upper . Their legs were shorter than their arms, but very thick, and they wore no boots at all; their feet were broad splayed things, hard and horny and black . Neckless, their huge heavy heads thrust forward from between their shoulder blades, and their faces were squashed and brutal . Rats ' eyes no larger than beads were almost lost within folds of horny flesh, but they snuffled constantly, smelling as much as they saw.The books will still be here when we return.Jon insisted . [BOS] I never said that, [EOS] Those are not sheep bones, though . Nor is that a sheep ' s skull in the ashes.No one had told him the Night ' s Watch would be like this; no one except Tyrion Lannister . The dwarf had given him the truth on the road north, but by then it had been too late . Jon wondered if his father had known what the Wall would be like . He must have, he thought; that only made it hurt the worse.He did not have to search for targets now; only choose them . He dropped a wildling archer as he was fitting an arrow to his string, then sent a shaft toward the axeman hacking at the door of Hardin ' s Tower . That time he missed, but the arrow quivering in the oak made the wildling reconsider . It was only as he was running off that Jon recognized Big Boil . Half a heartbeat later, old Mully put an arrow through his leg from the roof of the Flint Barracks, and he crawled off bleeding . That will stop him bitching about his boil, Jon thought.They had pulled him out this morning, after four days in the ice, locked up in a cell five by five by five, too low for him to stand, too tight for him to stretch out on his back . The stewards had long ago discovered that food and meat kept longer in the icy storerooms carved from the base of the Wall . . . but prisoners did not . You will die in here, Lord Snow, Ser Alliser had said just before he closed the heavy wooden door, and Jon had believed it . But this morning they had come and pulled him out again, and marched him cramped and shivering back to the King ' s Tower, to stand before jowly Janos Slynt once moreJon ' s face was throbbing, the snow kept coming down, and it was hard to think . You must not balk, whatever is asked of you, Qhorin had told him . The words stuck in his throat, but he made himself say, [BOS] There were three hundred of us . [EOS] Jon said . [BOS] Yes, my lord, I rode with the wildlings and ate with them, as the Halfhand commanded me, and I shared my furs with Ygritte . But I swear to you, I never turned my cloak . I escaped the Magnar as soon as I could, and never took up arms against my brothers or the realm . [EOS] She grinned at that, showing Jon the crooked teeth that he had somehow come to love . Wildling to the bone, he thought again, with a sick sad feeling in the pit of his stomach . He flexed the fingers of his sword hand, and wondered what Ygritte would do if she knew his heart . Would she betray him if he sat her down and told her that he was still Ned Stark ' s son and a man of the Night ' s Watch? He hoped not, but he dare not take that risk . Too many lives depended on his somehow reaching Castle Black before the Magnar . . . assuming he found a chance to escape the wildlings.That was too much . Jon wrenched free of his friends and retreated to the armory, alone . His ears were still ringing from the blow Emmett had dealt him . He sat on the bench and buried his head in his hands . Why am I so angry? he asked himself, but it was a stupid question . Lord of Winterfell . I could be the Lord of Winterfell . My father ' s heir.I ' m no lord.He fathered a bastard, a small voice whispered inside him . Where was the honor in that? And your mother, what of her? He will not even speak her name.As the stars began to fade in the eastern sky, the Wall appeared before him, rising above the trees and the morning mists . Moonlight glimmered pale against the ice . He urged the gelding on, following the muddy slick road until he saw the stone towers and timbered halls of Castle Black huddled like broken toys beneath the great cliff of ice . By then the Wall glowed pink and purple with the first light of dawn.with no true companion but tears.Stonesnake warmed his hands over the fire . What waits beyond the pass?A wind sighed through the trees, rich with the smell of pine needles, tugging at his faded blacks . Jon could see the Wall looming high and dark to the south, a great shadow blocking out the stars . The rough hilly ground made him think they must be somewhere between the Shadow Tower and Castle Black, and likely closer to the former . For days they had been wending their way south between deep lakes that stretched like long thin fingers along the floors of narrow valleys, while flint ridges and pine-clad hills jostled against one another to either side . Such ground made for slow riding, but offered easy concealment for those wishing to approach the Wall unseen.As they led their horses back to the stable, Jon was uncomfortably aware that people were watching him . Ser Alliser Thorne was drilling his boys in the yard, but he broke off to stare at Jon, a faint half smile on his lips . One-armed Donal Noye stood in the door of the armory . The gods be with you, Snow, he called out.He settled back in his place on the bench among the younger squires and drank . The sweet, fruity taste of summerwine filled his mouth and brought a smile to his lips.And suddenly he was back in the mountains, his paws sunk deep in a drift of snow as he stood upon the edge of a great precipice . Before him the Skirling Pass opened up into airy emptiness, and a long vee-shaped valley lay spread beneath him like a quilt, awash in all the colors of an autumn afternoon.What happened to them?Jon . Melisandre was so close he could feel the warmth of her breath . R ' hllor is the only true god . A vow sworn to a tree has no more power than one sworn to your shoes . Open your heart and let the light of the Lord come in . Burn these weirwoods, and accept Winterfell as a gift of the Lord of Light.I never meant to steal you, he said . I never knew you were a girl until my knife was at your throat.Har! boomed the white-bearded man . Well answered!Jarl soon had his men edging upward again . His four and Grigg ' s moved almost side by side, with Errok ' s fifty feet below . Deerhorn axes chopped and hacked, sending showers of glittery shards cascading down onto the trees . Stone hammers pounded stakes deep into the ice to serve as anchors for the ropes; the iron stakes ran out before they were halfway up, and after that the climbers used horn and sharpened bone . And the men kicked, driving the spikes on their boots against the hard unyielding ice again and again and again and again to make one foothold . Their legs must be numb, Jon thought by the fourth hour . How long can they keep on with that? He watched as restless as the Magnar, listening for the distant moan of a Thenn warhorn . But the horns stayed silent, and there was no sign of the Night ' s Watch.Jon shouted back, a black arrow in his hand . [BOS] We kill them, [EOS] Jon said . [BOS] I came to see Bran, To say good-bye . [EOS] Her eyes found him . They were full of poison . I need none of your absolution, bastard.See, the Old Bear ' s clever . If we get the wildling well and truly drunk, perhaps he ' ll only cut off an ear when he tries to slay us with that axe . I have two ears but only one head.And death leapt down amongst them.The horse was well lathered, so Jon took the lead and walked her for a while . The road was scarcely wide enough for two riders to pass abreast, its surface cut by tiny streams and littered with stone . That run had been truly stupid, an invitation to a broken neck . Jon wondered what had gotten into him . Was he in such a great rush to die?Outside the armory, Ser Endrew Tarth was working with some raw recruits . They ' d come in last night with Conwy, one of the wandering crows who roamed the Seven Kingdoms collecting men for the Wall . This new crop consisted of a greybeard leaning on a staff, two blond boys with the look of brothers, a foppish youth in soiled satin, a raggy man with a clubfoot, and some grinning loon who must have fancied himself a warrior . Ser Endrew was showing him the error of that presumption . He was a gentler master-at-arms than Ser Alliser Thorne had been, but his lessons would still raise bruises . Sam winced at every blow, but Jon Snow watched the swordplay closely.Don ' t call me Lord Snow.To me, Ghost . Jon knelt . Bring it here.Jon took his accustomed position at Mormont ' s side as the Night ' s Watch streamed out past the skulls on Craster ' s gate . They struck off north and west along a crooked game trail . Melting ice dripped down all about them, a slower sort of rain with its own soft music . North of the compound, the brook was in full spate, choked with leaves and bits of wood, but the scouts had found where the ford lay and the column was able to splash across . The water ran as high as a horse ' s belly . Ghost swam, emerging on the bank with his white fur dripping brown . When he shook, spraying mud and water in all directions, Mormont said nothing, but on his shoulder the raven screeched.No doubt . You ' d best get a bird ready . Mormont will want to send back word.My thanks to all of you, the fat boy said gravely.Jon replied, and he did . [BOS] Then get out of my way, ser, [EOS] And what metal is Robb? Jon did not ask . Noye was a Baratheon man; likely he thought Joffrey the lawful king and Robb a traitor . Among the brotherhood of the Night ' s Watch, there was an unspoken pact never to probe too deeply into such matters . Men came to the Wall from all of the Seven Kingdoms, and old loves and loyalties were not easily forgotten, no matter how many oaths a man swore . . . as Jon himself had good reason to know . Even Sam—his father ' s House was sworn to Highgarden, whose Lord Tyrell supported King Renly . Best not to talk of such things . The Night ' s Watch took no sides . Jon said . [BOS] Lord Mormont awaits us, [EOS] Jon Snow straightened himself and took a long deep breath . Forgive me, Father . Robb, Arya, Bran … forgive me, I cannot help you . He has the truth of it . This is my place . [BOS] I am … yours, my lord . Your man . I swear it . I will not run again . [EOS] Craven or not, Samwell Tarly had found the courage to accept his fate like a man . On the Wall, a man gets only what he earns, Benjen Stark had said the last night Jon had seen him alive . You ' re no ranger, Jon, only a green boy with the smell of summer still on you . He ' d heard it said that bastards grow up faster than other children; on the Wall, you grew up or you died.Jon felt anger rise inside him . [BOS] I ' m not your son! [EOS] But the Dornishman ' s blade was made of black steel,Yes, my lord . Jon built a cookfire, claimed a small cask of Mormont ' s favorite robust red from stores, and poured it into a kettle . He hung the kettle above the flames while he gathered the rest of his ingredients . The Old Bear was particular about his hot spiced wine . So much cinnamon and so much nutmeg and so much honey, not a drop more . Raisins and nuts and dried berries, but no lemon, that was the rankest sort of southron heresy—which was queer, since he always took lemon in his morning beer . The drink must be hot to warm a man properly, the Lord Commander insisted, but the wine must never be allowed to come to a boil . Jon kept a careful eye on the kettle.Ygritte pushed herself onto an elbow . I am nineteen, and a spearwife, and kissed by fire . How could I be maiden?Do you remember the words of your vow?Jon smiled . [BOS] Want them all for yourself, Dywen? [EOS] All the same, Jon found himself hoping that Styr ' s fears proved well founded . If the gods are good, a patrol will chance by and put an end to this . No wall can keep you safe, his father had told him once, as they walked the walls of Winterfall . A wall is only as strong as the men who defend it . The wildlings might have a hundred and twenty men, but four defenders would be enough to see them off, with a few well-placed arrows and perhaps a pail of stones.He had thought on it long and hard, lying abed at night while his brothers slept around him . Robb would someday inherit Winterfell, would command great armies as the Warden of the North . Bran and Rickon would be Robb ' s bannermen and rule holdfasts in his name . His sisters Arya and Sansa would marry the heirs of other great houses and go south as mistress of castles of their own . But what place could a bastard hope to earn?He listened to the sound of hooves growing steadily louder as they trotted briskly down the kingsroad . From the sound, there were five or six of them at the least . Their voices drifted through the trees.Unless he was slain as well, Ser Jaremy insisted.Dywen sucked at his wooden teeth . Might be they didn ' t die here . Might be someone brought ' em and left ' em for us . A warning, as like . The old forester peered down suspiciously . And might be I ' m a fool, but I don ' t know that Othor never had no blue eyes afore.Jon, please . You must not do this.Ser Jaremy shook his head . Would that I knew.On your feet, Thorne repeated . The fat boy struggled to rise, slipped, and fell heavily again . Ser Piggy is starting to grasp the notion, Ser Alliser observed . Again.Ygritte wanted me to be a wildling . Stannis wants me to be the Lord of Winterfell . But what do I want? The sun crept down the sky to dip behind the Wall where it curved through the western hills . Jon watched as that towering expanse of ice took on the reds and pinks of sunset . Would I sooner be hanged for a turncloak by Lord Janos, or forswear my vows, marry Val, and become the Lord of Winterfell? It seemed an easy choice when he thought of it in those terms . . . though if Ygritte had still been alive, it might have been even easier . Val was a stranger to him . She was not hard on the eyes, certainly, and she had been sister to Mance Rayder ' s queen, but still . . .He could have ridden east, for all you know . Or left the road to cut through the woods . That ' s what I ' d do.The last few moles were still making the long climb, Jon saw, urged on by his brothers . Grenn was carrying a little boy in his arms, while Pyp, two flights below, let an old man lean upon his shoulder . The oldest villagers still waited below for the cage to make its way back down to them . He saw a mother pulling along two children, one on either hand, as an older boy ran past her up the steps . Two hundred feet above them, Sky Blue Su and Lady Meliana (who was no lady, all her friends agreed) stood on a landing, looking south . They had a better view of the smoke than he did, no doubt . Jon wondered about the villagers who had chosen not to flee . There were always a few, too stubborn or too stupid or too brave to run, a few who preferred to fight or hide or bend the knee . Maybe the Thenns would spare them.Jon scarcely heard him . He brushed off Tyrion ' s hand and strode across the hall . He was running by the time he hit the doors . He raced to the Commander ' s Keep, dashing through drifts of old snow . When the guards passed him, he took the tower steps two at a time . By the time he burst into the presence of the Lord Commander, his boots were soaked and Jon was wild-eyed and panting . Bran, he said . What does it say about Bran?Your Grace? The earless man looked at the big white-bearded one . You see . He takes me for a king.Gods be good, Dywen muttered . That ' s a hand.There they are, Ygritte said, and Jon glanced up to see the first climber emerge above the treetops . It was Jarl . He had found a sentinel tree that leaned against the Wall, and led his men up the trunk to get a quicker start . The wood should never have been allowed to creep so close . They ' re three hundred feet up, and they haven ' t touched the ice itself yet.In the dark? Stupid . If you didn ' t fall off your horse and break your neck, you ' d get lost and wind up back at the Wall when the sun came up.He had almost forgotten about his face . A skinchanger tried to rip out my eye.Jon smiled . [BOS] Well, I hear he ' s been here a long time . [EOS] The Halfhand eased himself to the ground and sat cross-legged by the fire, the flickering light playing across the hard planes of his face . Only the two of them remained of the five rangers who had fled the Skirling Pass, back into the blue-grey wilderness of the Frostfangs.We call them merlons . They were painted gold a long time ago . This is Queenscrown.A deep restlessness was on him as he went back to Hardin ' s Tower for Ghost . The direwolf walked beside him to the stables . Some of the more skittish horses kicked at their stalls and laid back their ears as they entered . Jon saddled his mare, mounted, and rode out from Castle Black, south across the moonlit night . Ghost raced ahead of him, flying over the ground, gone in the blink of an eye . Jon let him go . A wolf needed to hunt.Tyrion Lannister laid a hand on his arm . Jon, he said . I am truly sorry.In Mance Rayder?Granite does not burn easily, Stannis said . The castle can be rebuilt, in time . It ' s not the walls that make a lord, it ' s the man . Your northmen do not know me, have no reason to love me, yet I will need their strength in the battles yet to come . I need a son of Eddard Stark to win them to my banner.The wildling king studied his face . Who had the command here? And tell me true . Was it Rykker? Smallwood? Not Wythers, he ' s too feeble . Whose tent was this?Jon said sharply, but the force had gone out of his anger . Suddenly he felt ashamed and guilty . [BOS] Don ' t call me that! I never … I didn ' t think … [EOS] A blacksmith . He only had one arm.The Dornishman ' s wife would sing as she bathed,As you say, Your—Mance.My steward and squire, Jon Snow.Bran, he said, I ' m sorry I didn ' t come before . I was afraid . He could feel the tears rolling down his cheeks . Jon no longer cared . Don ' t die, Bran . Please . We ' re all waiting for you to wake up . Me and Robb and the girls, everyone …King Stannis gazed off north again, his gold cloak streaming from his shoulders . It may be that I am mistaken in you, Jon Snow . We both know the things that are said of bastards . You may lack your father ' s honor, or your brother ' s skill in arms . But you are the weapon the Lord has given me . I have found you here, as you found the cache of dragonglass beneath the Fist, and I mean to make use of you . Even Azor Ahai did not win his war alone . I killed a thousand wildlings, took another thousand captive, and scattered the rest, but we both know they will return . Melisandre has seen that in her fires . This Tormund Thunderfist is likely re-forming them even now, and planning some new assault . And the more we bleed each other, the weaker we shall all be when the real enemy falls upon us.Only now those foes have gotten past the Wall to come up from the south, Jon reflected, and the lords and kings of the Seven Kingdoms have forgotten us . We are caught between the hammer and the anvil . Without a wall Castle Black could not be held; Donal Noye knew that as well as any . The castle does them no good, the armorer told his little garrison . Kitchens, common hall, stables, even the towers . . . let them take it all . We ' ll empty the armory and move what stores we can to the top of the Wall, and make our stand around the gate.Jon heard Grenn suck in his breath, shocked . Silence fell.No, you especially, said Mance.That old maester says I cannot hang you, Slynt declared . He has written Cotter Pyke, and even had the bloody gall to show me the letter . He says you are no turncloak.He was almost ready to lower his blade and call a halt when Emmett feinted low and came in over his shield with a savage forehand slash that caught Jon on the temple . He staggered, his helm and head both ringing from the force of the blow . For half a heartbeat the world beyond his eyeslit was a blur.A line of fires burned along the top of the Wall, contained in iron baskets on poles taller than a man . The cold knife of the wind stirred and swirled the flames, so the lurid orange light was always shifting . Bundles of quarrels, arrows, spears, and scorpion bolts stood ready on every hand . Rocks were piled ten feet high, big wooden barrels of pitch and lamp oil lined up beside them . Bowen Marsh had left Castle Black well supplied in everything save men . The wind was whipping at the black cloaks of the scarecrow sentinels who stood along the ramparts, spears in hand . Jon said to Donal Noye when he limped up beside him . [BOS] I hope it wasn ' t one of them who blew the horn, [EOS] And suddenly Jon was back in the Lord Commander ' s Tower again . A severed hand was climbing his calf and when he pried it off with the point of his longsword, it lay writhing, fingers opening and closing . The dead man rose to his feet, blue eyes shining in that gashed and swollen face . Ropes of torn flesh hung from the great wound in his belly, yet there was no blood.I am loath to risk more men.The woman regarded them with nervous eyes . She was younger than he ' d thought at first . A girl of fifteen or sixteen years, he judged, dark hair plastered across a gaunt face by the falling rain, her bare feet muddy to the ankles . The body under the sewn skins was showing in the early turns of pregnancy . Are you one of Craster ' s daughters? he asked.Here they come, someone said in a hoarse voice.The rain might have stopped, but the compound was still a morass of shallow lakes and slippery mud . Black brothers were folding their tents, feeding their horses, and chewing on strips of salt beef . Jarman Buckwell ' s scouts were tightening the girths on their saddles before setting out . Jon, Buckwell greeted him from horseback . Keep a good edge on that bastard sword of yours . We ' ll be needing it soon enough.Jon made himself smile . [BOS] That would be a welcome sight to see, Owen . [EOS] Ignoring the twinge of pain in his leg, he swept a black fur cloak about his shoulders, gathered up his crutch, and went out onto the Wall to face another day.Our honor means no more than our lives, so long as the realm is safe . Are you a man of the Night ' s Watch?The Halfhand said, A horn they must not blow.The answer was there . Is it . . . it seems to me that it might be easier for one man to find two hundred than for two hundred to find one.Jon could see fear and fire in her eyes . Blood ran down her white throat from where the point of his dirk had pricked her . One thrust and it ' s done, he told himself . He was so close he could smell onion on her breath . She is no older than I am . Something about her made him think of Arya, though they looked nothing at all alike . [BOS] Will you yield? [EOS] he asked, giving the dirk a half turn . And if she doesn ' t?There ' s no time . There are wildlings south of the Wall, coming up from Queenscrown to open the gate.Jon ' s eyes widened in disbelief . [BOS] That can ' t be so . [EOS] It was a long walk down to the yard.Noye drew him closer . You ' ve heard these tidings of your brother?And what if they do? I ' d sooner be stolen by a strong man than be given t ' some weakling by my father.M-m-maester Aemon m-means to p-pick them come evenfall, after the f-f-feeding.When he had read that, Jon had dispatched Zei to Mole ' s Town on their best horse to plead with the villagers to help man the Wall . She never returned . When he sent Mully after her, he came back to report the whole village deserted, even the brothel . Most likely Zei had followed them, straight down the kingsroad . Maybe we should all do the same, Jon reflected glumly.He could hear the noise even before he reached the bottom of the steps; raised voices, curses, someone pounding on a table . Jon stepped into the vault all but unnoticed . His brothers crowded the benches and the tables, but more were standing and shouting than were sitting, and no one was eating . There was no food . What ' s happening here? Lord Janos Slynt was bellowing about turncloaks and treason, Iron Emmett stood on a table with a naked sword in his fist, Three-Finger Hobb was cursing a ranger from the Shadow Tower . . . some Eastwatch man slammed his fist onto the table again and again, demanding quiet, but all that did was add to the din echoing off the vaulted ceiling.Me? He frowned . What do you mean?Jon shrugged . [BOS] It changes . I ' ve heard that Lord Commander Qorgyle used to send them out every third day from Castle Black to Eastwatch-by-the-Sea, and every second day from Castle Black to the Shadow Tower . The Watch had more men in his day, though . Lord Commander Mormont prefers to vary the number of patrols and the days of their departure, to make it more difficult for anyone to know their comings and goings . And sometimes the Old Bear will even send a larger force to one of the abandoned castles for a fortnight or a moon ' s turn . [EOS] His uncle had originated that tactic, Jon knew . Anything to make the enemy unsure.He had his answer then.There was a tree with my brother ' s face . The wildlings . . . there were thousands, more than I ever knew existed . And giants riding mammoths . From the way the light had shifted, Jon judged that he had been asleep for four or five hours . His head ached, and the back of his neck where the talons had burned through him . But that was in the dream.She stared at the flames as if she could not hear him.Half the men at Castle Black visited Mole ' s Town from time to time to dig for buried treasures in the brothel, Jon knew, but he would not dishonor Ygritte by equating her with the Mole ' s Town whores . I broke my vows with a woman . I admit that . Yes.Jon said, too quickly . It was Winterfell the king was speaking of, and Winterfell was not to be lightly refused . [BOS] No, I mean . . . this has all come very suddenly, Your Grace . Might I beg you for some time to consider? [EOS] He watched the wildling move carefully from wood to Wall, hacking out a handhold with short sharp blows of his ice axe, then swinging over . The rope around his waist tied him to the second man in line, still edging up the tree . Step by slow step, Jarl moved higher, kicking out toeholds with his spiked boots when there were no natural ones to be found . When he was ten feet above the sentinel, he stopped upon a narrow icy ledge, slung his axe from his belt, took out his hammer, and drove an iron stake into a cleft . The second man moved onto the Wall behind him while the third was scrambling to the top of the tree.I ' ll go, my lord . But you are making a mistake, my lord . You are sending the wrong man, my lord . Just the sight of me is going to anger Mance . My lord would have a better chance of reaching terms if he sent—You call that a bed?Ghost padded restlessly by Jon ' s side . From time to time he would stop and turn, his ears pricked, as if he heard something behind them . Jon did not think the shadowcats would attack living men, not unless they were starving, but he loosened Longclaw in its scabbard even so.Wildlings have invaded the realm before . Jon had heard the tales from Old Nan and Maester Luwin both, back at Winterfell . Raymun Redbeard led them south in the time of my grandfather ' s grandfather, and before him there was a king named Bael the Bard.In the very shadow of the Wall the wildlings made ready, winding thick coils of hempen rope around one shoulder and down across their chests, and lacing on queer boots of supple doeskin . The boots had spikes jutting from the toes; iron, for Jarl and two others, bronze for some, but most often jagged bone . Small stone-headed hammers hung from one hip, a leathern bag of stakes from the other . Their ice axes were antlers with sharpened tines, bound to wooden hafts with strips of hide . The eleven climbers sorted themselves into three teams of four; Jarl himself made the twelfth man . Mance promises swords for every man of the first team to reach the top, he told them, his breath misting in the cold air . Southron swords of castle-forged steel . And your name in the song he ' ll make of this, that too . What more could a free man ask? Up, and the Others take the hindmost!No, she said . There ' s nothing behind us . The look she gave him was sad . By now Mance is well down the Milkwater, marching on your Wall.And the grumkins and the snarks, Tyrion said . Let us not forget them, Lord Snow, or else what ' s that big thing for?If I don ' t fall in the mud . Sam struggled back into his boots, collected quill and parchment, and shouldered out into the night, the rain pattering down on his cloak and floppy hat.Jon remembered . [BOS] They say you forged his warhammer, [EOS] Back . Qhorin mounted his weary garron one more time . The fire will draw them past, I hope . Come, brother.That morning he called it first . I ' m Lord of Winterfell! he cried, as he had a hundred times before . Only this time, this time, Robb had answered, You can ' t be Lord of Winterfell, you ' re bastard-born . My lady mother says you can ' t ever be the Lord of Winterfell.Yes, he said.Arya seemed puzzled at first . Then it came to her . She was that quick . They said it together:Watchers in the Skirling Pass, wondered the oldest among them . In the spring of his youth, he had been squire to a king, so the black brothers still called him Squire Dalbridge . What is it Mance Rayder fears, I wonder?What if the sky was cloudy? Pyp asked.No . The Aurochs lost.Maester Aemon thinks you clever . Mormont moved the raven to his shoulder . The bird tilted its head to one side, little eyes a-glitter.Last night he had dreamt the Winterfell dream again . He was wandering the empty castle, searching for his father, descending into the crypts . Only this time the dream had gone further than before . In the dark he ' d heard the scrape of stone on stone . When he turned he saw that the vaults were opening, one after the other . As the dead kings came stumbling from their cold black graves, Jon had woken in pitch-dark, his heart hammering . Even when Ghost leapt up on the bed to nuzzle at his face, he could not shake his deep sense of terror . He dared not go back to sleep . Instead he had climbed the Wall and walked, restless, until he saw the light of the dawn off to the east . It was only a dream . I am a brother of the Night ' s Watch now, not a frightened boy.Ygritte fell silent.The king ' s men were much in evidence in the yards of Castle Black . They stopped as Jon went by, and gaped at him . None of them had ever seen a direwolf before, he realized, and Ghost was twice as large as the common wolves that prowled their southron greenwoods . As he walked toward the armory, Jon chanced to look up and saw Val standing in her tower window . I ' m sorry, he thought . I ' m not the man to steal you out of there.Jon was not entirely innocent of the history of the realm; his own maester had seen to that . That was the year of the Great Council, he said . The lords passed over Prince Aerion ' s infant son and Prince Daeron ' s daughter and gave the crown to Aegon.His fingers were growing stiff and his thumb was bleeding, but still Jon notched and drew and loosed . A gout of flame caught his eye, and he turned to see the door of the common hall afire . It was only a few moments before the whole great timbered hall was burning . Three-Finger Hobb and his Mole ' s Town helpers were safe atop the Wall, he knew, but it felt like a punch in the belly all the same . JON, Deaf Dick yelled in his thick voice, the armory . They were on the roof, he saw . One had a torch . Dick hopped up on the crenel for a better shot, jerked his crossbow to his shoulder, and sent a quarrel thrumming toward the torch man . He missed.They ' ll cut off your head if they catch you, you know, Toad put in with a nervous laugh . This is so stupid, it ' s like something the Aurochs would do.One of the mammoths was running berserk, smashing wildlings with his trunk and crushing archers underfoot . Jon pulled back his bow once more, and launched another arrow at the beast ' s shaggy back to urge him on . To east and west, the flanks of the wildling host had reached the Wall unopposed . The chariots drew in or turned while the horsemen milled aimlessly beneath the looming cliff of ice . At the gate! a shout came . Spare Boot, maybe . Mammoth at the gate!Jon Snow took a step forward . Pyp laid a mailed hand on his arm . [BOS] Jon, no, [EOS] the small boy whispered with an anxious glance at Ser Alliser Thorne.Jon tried to sound confident . [BOS] The worst is behind us . Don ' t be frightened . [EOS] He tried to put an arm around her.I ' m Jon Snow.Ser Endrew Tarth, a good man . He ' s on his way from the Shadow Tower to assume the duties of master-at-arms . Ser Alliser Thorne left yestermorn for Eastwatch-by-the-Sea.As he worked, he could hear the voices from inside the tent . Jarman Buckwell said, The easiest road up into the Frostfangs is to follow the Milkwater back to its source . Yet if we go that path, Rayder will know of our approach, certain as sunrise.Mance donned his helm with its raven wings . His men were mounted up as well . Arrowhead, Mance snapped, to me, form wedge . Yet when he slammed his heels into the mare and flew across the field at the rangers, the men who raced to catch him lost all semblance of formation.Midday came and went, with still no sign of Thenns on the kingsroad . Jon heard footsteps inside the tower, though, and Owen the Oaf popped up out of the trapdoor, red-faced from the climb . He had a basket of buns under one arm, a wheel of cheese under the other, a bag of onions dangling from one hand . Hobb said to feed you, in case you ' re stuck up here awhile.By the time the torch burned out, Jon Snow no longer cared.Melisandre was waiting for him at the base of the Wall . She had sent her queen ' s men away . Jon asked her as they entered the cage . [BOS] What does His Grace want of me? [EOS] I did . Though it was his doing more than mine.Jon looked around . [BOS] Lannister . I didn ' t see—I mean, I thought I was alone . [EOS] No one has . The last dragons died a hundred years ago or more . But this was before that.Mormont stood before the altar, the rainbow shining on his broad bald head . You came to us outlaws, he began, poachers, rapers, debtors, killers, and thieves . You came to us children . You came to us alone, in chains, with neither friends nor honor . You came to us rich, and you came to us poor . Some of you bear the names of proud houses . Others have only bastards ' names, or no names at all . It makes no matter . All that is past now . On the Wall, we are all one house.In here, her voice came back, echoing faintly.Suddenly he realized that the table had fallen silent, and they were all looking at him . He felt the tears begin to well behind his eyes . He pushed himself to his feet.The old man said no word . He only looked at Jon, standing amongst the wildlings . Amidst the rain and smoke, lit only by the fire, he could not have seen that Jon was all in black, but for his sheepskin cloak . Or could he?Don ' t you believe it, I just fed him, the Old Bear growled . He was seated by the window, reading a letter . Bring me a cup of wine, and pour one for yourself.When they were done, there was no sound but the faint crackle of the flames and a distant sigh of wind . Jon opened and closed his burnt fingers, holding tight to the words in his mind, praying that his father ' s gods would give him the strength to die bravely when his hour came . It would not be long now . The garrons were near the end of their strength . Qhorin ' s mount would not last another day, Jon suspected.I have never seen a dragon.What is it, man? Mormont said gruffly.With Mance Rayder ' s head, aye . Grenn was trying to sound cheerful, Jon could tell . Sam the Slayer!Jon urged, ignoring Thorne as best he could . [BOS] Look at him, Halder, There ' s no honor in beating a fallen foe . He yielded . [EOS] He knelt beside the fat boy.The fat one, that Sam, he said to see you . He give me his cloak, so no one would say I didn ' t belong.Yes . Jon knelt, and Sam knelt beside him.At a lord ' s court the girl would never have been considered anything but common, he knew . She had a round peasant face, a pug nose, and slightly crooked teeth, and her eyes were too far apart . Jon had noticed all that the first time he ' d seen her, when his dirk had been at her throat . Lately, though, he was noticing some other things . When she grinned, the crooked teeth didn ' t seem to matter . And maybe her eyes were too far apart, but they were a pretty blue-grey color, and lively as any eyes he knew . Sometimes she sang in a low husky voice that stirred him . And sometimes by the cookfire when she sat hugging her knees with the flames waking echoes in her red hair, and looked at him, just smiling . . . well, that stirred some things as well.The guard ' s sword was in its sheath . Jon knelt and worked it free . The heft of steel in his fist made him bolder . He moved up the steps, Ghost padding silently before him . Shadows lurked in every turn of the stair . Jon crept up warily, probing any suspicious darkness with the point of his sword.Jon said . [BOS] All we could wasn ' t enough, [EOS] Ghost returned as he crested a rise and saw the distant glow of lamplight from the Lord Commander ' s Tower . The direwolf ' s muzzle was red with blood as he trotted beside the horse . Jon found himself thinking of Samwell Tarly again on the ride back . By the time he reached the stables, he knew what he must do.Wary but excited, Arya checked the hall . Nymeria, here . Guard . She left the wolf out there to warn of intruders and closed the door . By then Jon had pulled off the rags he ' d wrapped it in . He held it out to her.We shall see . In the leather chair behind the table where the Old Bear wrote his letters sat a big, broad, jowly man Jon did not know . Yes, we shall see, he said again . You will not deny that you are Jon Snow, I hope? Stark ' s bastard?That ' s true enough, Benjen said with a downward twist of his mouth . He took Jon ' s cup from the table, filled it fresh from a nearby pitcher, and drank down a long swallow.Well, don ' t bother copying that one . Twenty-three barrels of pickled cod, eighteen jars of fish oil, a cask of salt . . .You admit to being an oathbreaker, then, said Janos Slynt.One was asleep, curled up tight and buried beneath a great mound of skins . Jon could see nothing of him but his hair, bright red in the firelight . The second sat close to the flames, feeding them twigs and branches and complaining of the wind in a querulous tone . The third watched the pass, though there was little to see, only a vast bowl of darkness ringed by the snowy shoulders of the mountains . It was the watcher who wore the horn.Jon commanded . The direwolf sat . [BOS] Ghost, stay, [EOS] Together they washed the caked blood from the direwolf ' s fur . Ghost struggled and bared his teeth when Qhorin poured the wine into the ragged red gashes the eagle had left him, but Jon wrapped his arms around him and murmured soothing words, and soon enough the wolf quieted . By the time they ' d ripped a strip from Jon ' s cloak to wrap the wounds, full dark had settled . Only a dusting of stars set the black of sky apart from the black of stone . Do we press on? Stonesnake wanted to know.The men beneath the wood and hides would be pulling hard, Jon knew, putting their shoulders into it, straining to keep the wheels turning, but once the turtle was flush against the gate they would exchange their ropes for axes . At least Mance was not sending his mammoths today . Jon was glad of that . Their awesome strength was wasted on the Wall, and their size only made them easy targets . The last had been a day and a half in the dying, its mournful trumpetings terrible to hear.Later, much later, after they had marched him back to his sleeping cell, Mormont came down to see him, raven on his shoulder . I told you not to do anything stupid, boy, the Old Bear said . Boy, the bird chorused . Mormont shook his head, disgusted . And to think I had high hopes for you.You know nothing, Jon Snow . Daughters are taken, not wives . You ' re the ones who steal . You took the whole world, and built the Wall t ' keep the free folk out.He had no destination in mind . He wanted only to ride . He followed the creek for a time, listening to the icy trickle of water over rock, then cut across the fields to the kingsroad . It stretched out before him, narrow and stony and pocked with weeds, a road of no particular promise, yet the sight of it filled Jon Snow with a vast longing . Winterfell was down that road, and beyond it Riverrun and King ' s Landing and the Eyrie and so many other places; Casterly Rock, the Isles of Faces, the red mountains of Dorne, the hundred islands of Braavos in the sea, the smoking ruins of old Valyria . All the places that Jon would never see . The world was down that road … and he was here.Cold, but the rain has stopped.The other houses had yielded no wisdom . Gone, cried Mormont ' s raven, flapping up into the weirwood to perch above them . Gone, gone, gone.I ' d hoped he chose the mountains to hide his muster from the eyes of my rangers.The mare whickered softly as Jon Snow tightened the cinch . Easy, sweet lady, he said in a soft voice, quieting her with a touch . Wind whispered through the stable, a cold dead breath on his face, but Jon paid it no mind . He strapped his roll to the saddle, his scarred fingers stiff and clumsy . Ghost, he called softly, to me . And the wolf was there, eyes like embers.Promise? said Slynt . Well, promise may turn false . Qhorin Halfhand ' s blood is on his hands . Mormont trusted him, you say, but what of that? I know what it is to be betrayed by men you trusted . Oh, yes . And I know the ways of wolves as well . He pointed at Jon ' s face . Your father died a traitor.The Halfhand helped himself to an egg and cracked it on the edge of the bowl . These kings will do what they will, he said, peeling away the shell . Likely it will be little enough . The best hope is Winterfell . The Starks must rally the north.A crow come over, said Rattleshirt, who preferred to be called the Lord of Bones, for the clattering armor he wore . He was afraid I ' d take his bones as well as Halfhand ' s. He shook his sack of trophies at the other wildlings.The mousy little skinchanger closed his eyes and said, I see them . They ' re coming along the streams and game trails . . .The wind whistled through the bars, and Jon Snow shivered . His leg was throbbing, and his head . He was not fit to kill a kitten, yet here he was . The trap had teeth . With Maester Aemon insisting on Jon ' s innocence, Lord Janos had not dared to leave him in the ice to die . This was better . Our honor means no more than our lives, so long as the realm is safe, Qhorin Halfhand had said in the Frostfangs . He must remember that . Whether he slew Mance or only tried and failed, the free folk would kill him . Even desertion was impossible, if he ' d been so inclined; to Mance he was a proven liar and betrayer.Thorne smiled . The Bastard wishes to defend his lady love, so we shall make an exercise of it . Rat, Pimple, help our Stone Head here . Rast and Albett moved to join Halder . Three of you ought to be sufficient to make Lady Piggy squeal . All you need do is get past the Bastard.Ghost was trotting along beside Jon ' s horse with tail held high, his white fur ruffed up thick against the rain . He moved so silently Jon could not have said just when he appeared . Grenn ' s mount shied at the scent of him; even now, after more than a year, the horses were uneasy in the presence of the direwolf . Jon spurred off to Craster ' s Keep . [BOS] With me, Ghost . [EOS] And Val ' s no man, white-bearded Tormund snorted . You ought to have noticed that by now, lad.Jon shouted, sitting up . He could still feel the talons, the pain . [BOS] Ghost! Ghost, to me! [EOS] Ours is a striding huntsman, Samwell Tarly said.His words sent a chill of excitement down Jon ' s back . Beyond the Wall?Jon told him . [BOS] I have one more farewell to make, [EOS] Soon, Jon thought as they climbed . He ' d seen the harbinger that had come to Maester Aemon with word of summer ' s end, the great raven of the Citadel, white and silent as Ghost . He had seen a winter once, when he was very young, but everyone agreed that it had been a short one, and mild . This one would be different . He could feel it in his bones.The evening meal was almost done by the time he and Ghost reached the common hall . A group of the black brothers were dicing over mulled wine near the fire . His friends were at the bench nearest the west wall, laughing . Pyp was in the middle of a story . The mummer ' s boy with the big ears was a born liar with a hundred different voices, and he did not tell his tales so much as live them, playing all the parts as needed, a king one moment and a swineherd the next . When he turned into an alehouse girl or a virgin princess, he used a high falsetto voice that reduced them all to tears of helpless laughter, and his eunuchs were always eerily accurate caricatures of Ser Alliser . Jon took as much pleasure from Pyp ' s antics as anyone … yet that night he turned away and went instead to the end of the bench, where Samwell Tarly sat alone, as far from the others as he could get.Does that mean …?I can too, Grenn insisted.Lord Janos Slynt sat down so heavily he made a thump, but Ser Alliser filled the vault with mocking laughter . Ser Piggy thinks we ' re all fools, brothers, he said . He ' s taught the bird this little trick . They all say snow, go up to the rookery and hear for yourselves . Mormont ' s bird had more words than that.Aye, you did . You jumped down the mountain and killed Orell, and afore I could get my axe you had a knife at my throat . I thought you ' d have me then, or kill me, or maybe both, but you never did . And when I told you the tale o ' Bael the Bard and how he plucked the rose o ' Winterfell, I thought you ' d know to pluck me then for certain, but you didn ' t . You know nothing, Jon Snow . She gave him a shy smile . You might be learning some, though.They tell me that you slew one of these walking corpses to save Lord Mormont ' s life, Stannis said . It may be that this is your war as well, Lord Snow . If you will give me your help.As they rode down in the cage, Pyp took off his helm and wiped his brow . Frozen sweat . Is there anything as disgusting as frozen sweat? He laughed . Gods, I don ' t think I have ever been so hungry . I could eat an aurochs whole, I swear it . Do you think Hobb will cook up Grenn for us? When he saw Jon ' s face, his smile died . What ' s wrong? Is it your leg?And there were folks fiercer even than Varamyr, from the northernmost reaches of the haunted forest, the hidden valleys of the Frostfangs, and even queerer places: the men of the Frozen Shore who rode in chariots made of walrus bones pulled along by packs of savage dogs, the terrible ice-river clans who were said to feast on human flesh, the cave dwellers with their faces dyed blue and purple and green . With his own eyes Jon had beheld the Hornfoot men trotting along in column on bare soles as hard as boiled leather . He had not seen any snarks or grumpkins, but for all he knew Tormund would be having some to supper.And suddenly Ghost was back, stalking softly between two weirwoods . White fur and red eyes, Jon realized, disquieted . Like the trees …Stonesnake has the horn now, though, and we took Ygritte ' s knife and axe . She ' s behind us, afoot, unarmed . . .