Aye, and long before them came the Horned Lord and the brother kings Gendel and Gorne, and in ancient days Joramun, who blew the Horn of Winter and woke giants from the earth . Each man of them broke his strength on the Wall, or was broken by the power of Winterfell on the far side . . . but the Night ’ s Watch is only a shadow of what we were, and who remains to oppose the wildlings besides us? The Lord of Winterfell is dead, and his heir has marched his strength south to fight the Lannisters . The wildlings may never again have such a chance as this . I knew Mance Rayder, Jon . He is an oathbreaker, yes . . . but he has eyes to see, and no man has ever dared to name him faintheart.Enough! Ser Alliser Thorne had a voice with an edge like Valyrian steel.You might, if you knew what it meant, Benjen said . If you knew what the oath would cost you, you might be less eager to pay the price, son.The tent was hot and smoky . Baskets of burning peat stood in all four corners, filling the air with a dim reddish light . More skins carpeted the ground . Jon felt utterly alone as he stood there in his blacks, awaiting the pleasure of the turncloak who called himself King-beyond-the-Wall . When his eyes had adjusted to the smoky red gloom, he saw six people, none of whom paid him any mind . A dark young man and a pretty blonde woman were sharing a horn of mead . A pregnant woman stood over a brazier cooking a brace of hens, while a grey-haired man in a tattered cloak of black and red sat crosslegged on a pillow, playing a lute and singing:Tormund Giantsbane heard the words and grinned . The last of the great mountain giants, who ruled all the world at my birth, he bellowed back through the snow.Jon said . [BOS] It was their lives or ours, If they had seen us, if they had sounded that horn . . . [EOS] You know nothing, Jon Snow . Daughters are taken, not wives . You ’ re the ones who steal . You took the whole world, and built the Wall t ’ keep the free folk out.Must I have a reason? Mormont shifted in his seat, frowning . Your brother Robb has been crowned King in the North . You and Aemon have that in common . A king for a brother.You know nothing, Jon Snow . This wall is made o ’ blood.It is, the Old Bear told him . It was my father ’ s sword, and his father ’ s before him . The Mormonts have carried it for five centuries . I wielded it in my day and passed it on to my son when I took the black.His words sent a chill of excitement down Jon ’ s back . Beyond the Wall?We can hope so . There were worse things than wildlings in the dark . Jon remembered the words the wildling king had spoken on the Fist of the First Men, as they stood amidst that pink snow . When the dead walk, walls and stakes and swords mean nothing . You cannot fight the dead, Jon Snow . No man knows that half so well as me . Just thinking of it made the wind seem a little colder.The Skirling Pass was really a series of passes, a long twisting course that went up around a succession of icy wind-carved peaks and down through hidden valleys that seldom saw the sun . Apart from his companions, Jon had glimpsed no living man since they ’ d left the wood behind and begun to make their way upward . The Frostfangs were as cruel as any place the gods had made, and as inimical to men . The wind cut like a knife up here, and shrilled in the night like a mother mourning her slain children . What few trees they saw were stunted, grotesque things growing sideways out of cracks and fissures . Tumbled shelves of rock often overhung the trail, fringed with hanging icicles that looked like long white teeth from a distance.What will we do? asked Jon.Robb was in the middle of it, shouting commands with the best of them . He seemed to have grown of late, as if Bran ’ s fall and his mother ’ s collapse had somehow made him stronger . Grey Wind was at his side.Whatever you called them, the straw soldiers had been Maester Aemon ’ s notion . They had more breeches and jerkins and tunics in the storerooms than they ’ d had men to fill them, so why not stuff some with straw, drape a cloak around their shoulders, and set them to standing watches? Noye had placed them on every tower and in half the windows . Some were even clutching spears, or had crossbows cocked under their arms . The hope was that the Thenns would see them from afar and decide that Castle Black was too well defended to attack.Lark made a grab for the second rabbit, but Ghost was quicker . When he bared his teeth, the Sisterman slipped in the mud and went down on his bony butt . The others laughed . The direwolf took the rabbit in his mouth and brought it to Jon.The fat boy shook his head . I was heir to my father ’ s blade once, he said mournfully . Heartsbane . Lord Randyll let me hold it a few times, but it always scared me . It was Valyrian steel, beautiful but so sharp I was afraid I ’ d hurt one of my sisters . Dickon will have it now . He wiped sweaty hands on his cloak . I … ah … Maester Aemon wants to see you.Jon waited by the cold iron bars while Pyp went to Maester Aemon for the spare key . Surprisingly, the maester himself returned with him, and Clydas with a lantern . Come see me when we are done, the old man told Jon while Pyp was fumbling with the chains . I need to change your dressing and apply a fresh poultice, and you will want some more dreamwine for the pain.Sam shook his head . No thank you, Jon.Jon knew that other men accused of treason had been allowed to redeem their honor on the Wall in days past . Why not Lord Eddard? His father here . That was a strange thought, and strangely uncomfortable . It would be a monstrous injustice to strip him of Winterfell and force him to take the black, and yet if it meant his life …One thing hasn ’ t changed, Ser Mallador Locke insisted . Fewer wildlings means fewer worries . I won ’ t mourn, whatever ’ s become of them . Raiders and murderers, the lot of them.He felt something scrabble at his ankle . Black fingers clawed at his calf . The arm was crawling up his leg, ripping at wool and flesh . Shouting with revulsion, Jon pried the fingers off his leg with the point of his sword and flipped the thing away . It lay writhing, fingers opening and closing.Tell me, Jon noted, not tell us, though Jarl stood right beside him . He would have liked nothing better than to refuse the brusque demand, but he knew Styr would put him to death at the slightest disloyalty, and Ygritte as well, for the crime of being his . There are four men in each patrol, two rangers and two builders, he said . The builders are supposed to make note of cracks, melting, and other structural problems, while the rangers look for signs of foes . They ride mules.Aye, Slynt said . A blind man with a chain about his neck, who does he think he is?He has a lord ’ s voice, Jon thought . His father had always said that in battle a captain ’ s lungs were as important as his sword arm . It does not matter how brave or brilliant a man is, if his commands cannot be heard, Lord Eddard told his sons, so Robb and he used to climb the towers of Winterfell to shout at each other across the yard . Donal Noye could have drowned out both of them . The moles all went in terror of him, and rightfully so, since he was always threatening to rip their heads off.Jon told the direwolf as he swung up into the saddle . He turned the mare ’ s head to slide off through the trees, but they were on him before he had gone ten feet . [BOS] Traitor, [EOS] I do, the fat boy blurted . He was older than Jon, a man grown by law, but it was hard to think of him as anything but a boy . I found drawings of the faces in the trees, and a book about the tongue of the children of the forest . . . works that even the Citadel doesn ’ t have, scrolls from old Valyria, counts of the seasons written by maesters dead a thousand years . . .He died on the sword of a brave man named Donal Noye.and her kisses were warmer than spring.There ’ s giants in the Frostfangs, and wargs, and worse things, said Lark the Sisterman.The raven flapped big black wings . Me, me, me.He could hear the noise even before he reached the bottom of the steps; raised voices, curses, someone pounding on a table . Jon stepped into the vault all but unnoticed . His brothers crowded the benches and the tables, but more were standing and shouting than were sitting, and no one was eating . There was no food . What ’ s happening here? Lord Janos Slynt was bellowing about turncloaks and treason, Iron Emmett stood on a table with a naked sword in his fist, Three-Finger Hobb was cursing a ranger from the Shadow Tower . . . some Eastwatch man slammed his fist onto the table again and again, demanding quiet, but all that did was add to the din echoing off the vaulted ceiling.Jon glanced warily at Chett, standing beside the door, his boils red and angry . He could help you, he said quickly . He can do sums, and he knows how to read and write . I know Chett can ’ t read, and Clydas has weak eyes . Sam read every book in his father ’ s library . He ’ d be good with the ravens too . Animals seem to like him . Ghost took to him straight off . There ’ s a lot he could do, besides fighting . The Night ’ s Watch needs every man . Why kill one, to no end? Make use of him instead.But he died, said Rattleshirt, same like you . He freed his battle-axe, brandishing it above his head . Good steel it was, with a wicked gleam to both blades; Ebben was never a man to neglect his weapons . The other wildlings crowded forward beside him, yelling taunts . A few chose Jon for their mockery . Is that your wolf, boy? a skinny youth called, unlimbering a stone flail . He ’ ll be my cloak before the sun is down . On the other side of the line, another spearwife opened her ragged furs to show Jon a heavy white breast . Does the baby want his momma? Come, have a suck o ’ this, boy . The dogs were barking too.Jon said . [BOS] Sam, you ’ re a sweet fool, You ’ ll miss that bed when we ’ re sleeping on the cold hard ground, I promise you . [EOS] Us? said Pyp . You call us fools? We ’ re not the ones who got chosen as the nine-hundredth-and-ninety-eighth Lord Commander of the Night ’ s Watch . You best have some wine, Lord Jon . I think you ’ re going to need a lot of wine.Gladly, said Jon.Jon told him . [BOS] The Lord Commander listens to you, And the wounded and the sick of the Night ’ s Watch are in your charge . [EOS] Ser Barristan had been the Old Bear ’ s best hope, Jon remembered; if he had fallen, what chance was there that Mormont ’ s letter would be heeded? He curled his hand into a fist . Pain shot through his burned fingers . What of my sisters?A craven can be as brave as any man, when there is nothing to fear . And we all do our duty, when there is no cost to it . How easy it seems then, to walk the path of honor . Yet soon or late in every man ’ s life comes a day when it is not easy, a day when he must choose.They rode in silence, until Jon said, If my uncle found all these villages empty as well—The smith released his grip on the bellows . Your face . . .No, he thought . The Wall protects the realm . From the Others . . . and from you and your kind as well, sweetling . I had another friend who dreamed of dragons . A dwarf . He told me—It was . When your father learned the king was coming, he sent word to his brother Benjen on the Wall, so he might come down for the feast . There is more commerce between the black brothers and the free folk than you know, and soon enough word came to my ears as well . It was too choice a chance to resist . Your uncle did not know me by sight, so I had no fear from that quarter, and I did not think your father was like to remember a young crow he ’ d met briefly years before . I wanted to see this Robert with my own eyes, king to king, and get the measure of your uncle Benjen as well . He was First Ranger by then, and the bane of all my people . So I saddled my fleetest horse, and rode.The last of the high lords to enter were his uncle, Benjen Stark of the Night ’ s Watch, and his father ’ s ward, young Theon Greyjoy . Benjen gave Jon a warm smile as he went by . Theon ignored him utterly, but there was nothing new in that . After all had been seated, toasts were made, thanks were given and returned, and then the feasting began.They found Dolorous Edd frying a rasher of bacon and boiling a dozen eggs in a kettle over the Old Bear ’ s cookfire . Mormont sat in his wood-and-leather camp chair . I had begun to fear for you . Did you meet with trouble?The wolf is strong, the ranger said . Ebben, water . Stonesnake, your skin of wine . Hold him still, Jon.I ’ m Jon Snow, Ned Stark ’ s bastard, of Winterfell.Jon said . There had been others . Too many . [BOS] No, [EOS] It did, once . Longclaw, it was called.He was chilled and feverish, and suddenly the weight of the longbow was too much . The battle with the Magnar had been nothing, he realized, and the night fight less than nothing, only a probe, a dagger in the dark to try and catch them unprepared . The real battle was only now beginning.They ’ ll all be seen to.By day they followed game trails and streambeds, the ranger ’ s roads that led them ever deeper into the wilderness of leaf and root . At night they camped beneath a starry sky and gazed up at the comet . The black brothers had left Castle Black in good spirits, joking and trading tales, but of late the brooding silence of the wood seemed to have sombered them all . Jests had grown fewer and tempers shorter . No one would admit to being afraid—they were men of the Night ’ s Watch, after all—but Jon could feel the unease . Four empty villages, no wildlings anywhere, even the game seemingly fled . The haunted forest had never seemed more haunted, even veteran rangers agreed.I scarcely know her.Jon shook his head . [BOS] Did Rattleshirt send word ahead? [EOS] I see, Lannister said . He ruffled the snow-white fur between Ghost ’ s ears and said, Nice wolf.The Horn of Winter? Ser Alliser chuckled . Were you commanded to count their snarks as well, Lord Snow?Then he saw the other one, waddling along half-hidden by his brother ’ s side . Tyrion Lannister, the youngest of Lord Tywin ’ s brood and by far the ugliest . All that the gods had given to Cersei and Jaime, they had denied Tyrion . He was a dwarf, half his brother ’ s height, struggling to keep pace on stunted legs . His head was too large for his body, with a brute ’ s squashed-in face beneath a swollen shelf of brow . One green eye and one black one peered out from under a lank fall of hair so blond it seemed white . Jon watched him with fascination.A soft scrabbling noise made him turn . Jon moved toward the sound, stepping carefully among boulders and thornbushes . Behind a fallen tree, he came on Ghost again . The direwolf was digging furiously, kicking up dirt.Jon had never been half the hunter that Theon was, but he was no stranger to the longbow either . There were dark shapes slipping around the armory, backs against the stone, but he could not see them well enough to waste an arrow . He heard distant shouts, and saw the archers on the Tower of Guards loosing shafts at the ground . That was too far off to concern Jon . But when he glimpsed three shadows detach themselves from the old stables fifty yards away, he stepped up to the crenel, raised his bow, and drew . They were running, so he led them, waiting, waiting . . .Jon had often heard the black brothers tell tales of Craster and his keep . Now he would see it with his own eyes . After seven empty villages, they had all come to dread finding Craster ’ s as dead and desolate as the rest, but it seemed they would be spared that . Perhaps the Old Bear will finally get some answers, he thought . Anyway, we ’ ll be out of the rain.Her face lit up . A present?Arrows for my brothers, Jon thought . Arrows for my father ’ s folk, for the people of Winterfell and Deepwood Motte and the Last Hearth . Arrows for the north.Donal Noye rounded on him . Any man here stays his sword, I ’ ll chuck his puckered arse right off this Wall . . . starting with you, Septon . Archers! Do we have any bloody archers?When day broke, Jon walked to the kitchens as he did every dawn . Three-Finger Hobb said nothing as he gave him the Old Bear ’ s breakfast . Today it was three brown eggs boiled hard, with fried bread and ham steak and a bowl of wrinkled plums . Jon carried the food back to the King ’ s Tower . He found Mormont at the window seat, writing . His raven was walking back and forth across his shoulders, muttering, Corn, corn, corn . The bird shrieked when Jon entered . Put the food on the table, the Old Bear said, glancing up . I ’ ll have some beer.I see no free folk . I see a crow and a crow wife.Your Lord Mormont trusted too easily . Else he would not have died as he did . But we were speaking of you . I have not forgotten that it was you who brought us this magic horn, and captured Mance Rayder ’ s wife and son.Well, that ’ s so, said Yarwyck . Anyway, now that I ’ m standing here, I don ’ t recall why I thought Slynt would be such a good choice . That would be sort of kicking King Stannis in the mouth, and I don ’ t see how that serves us . Might be Snow would be better . He ’ s been longer on the Wall, he ’ s Ben Stark ’ s nephew, and he served the Old Bear as squire . Yarwyck shrugged . Pick who you want, just so it ’ s not me . He sat down.Mance had spent years assembling this vast plodding host, talking to this clan mother and that magnar, winning one village with sweet words and another with a song and a third with the edge of his sword, making peace between Harma Dogshead and the Lord o ’ Bones, between the Hornfoots and the Nightrunners, between the walrus men of the Frozen Shore and the cannibal clans of the great ice rivers, hammering a hundred different daggers into one great spear, aimed at the heart of the Seven Kingdoms . He had no crown nor scepter, no robes of silk and velvet, but it was plain to Jon that Mance Rayder was a king in more than name.Others were gathering around and looking at him curiously . Jon noticed Grenn a few feet away . A thick woolen bandage was wrapped around one hand . He looked anxious and uncomfortable, not menacing at all . Jon went to him . Grenn edged backward and put up his hands . Stay away from me now, you bastard.The sounds of music and song spilled through the open windows behind him . They were the last things Jon wanted to hear . He wiped away his tears on the sleeve of his shirt, furious that he had let them fall, and turned to go.It was the fourth hour of the welcoming feast laid for the king . Jon ’ s brothers and sisters had been seated with the royal children, beneath the raised platform where Lord and Lady Stark hosted the king and queen . In honor of the occasion, his lord father would doubtless permit each child a glass of wine, but no more than that . Down here on the benches, there was no one to stop Jon drinking as much as he had a thirst for.Hours later, as the castle slept, three of them paid a call on his cell . Grenn held his arms while Pyp sat on his legs . Jon could hear Rast ’ s rapid breathing as Ghost leapt onto his chest . The direwolf ’ s eyes burned red as embers as his teeth nipped lightly at the soft skin of the boy ’ s throat, just enough to draw blood . Jon said softly . [BOS] Remember, we know where you sleep, [EOS] Qhorin Halfhand looked at him . Jon could hear the wind keening as it shivered through the high pass above them . One of the garrons whickered and pawed at the thin stony soil of the hollow where they had taken shelter . The wolf will remain with us, Qhorin said . White fur is seen too easily by moonlight . He turned to Stonesnake . When it ’ s done, throw down a burning brand . We ’ ll come when we see it fall.I ’ m here too . Grenn stepped to the other side of the bed . I fell asleep.She pulled back and gave him a look . Walk on water? What southron sorcery is that?You are few here, and isolated, Mormont said . If you like, I ’ ll detail some men to escort you south to the Wall.I ’ m the one they ’ ve sent.Ygritte was waiting too, sitting on her horse with a fierce look on her face . I am coming too.What did you say to him? Was that the Old Tongue?The day promised to be damp and cold, and damper and colder by the Wall, beneath those tons of ice . The closer they got, the more the Thenns held back . They have never seen the Wall before, not even the Magnar, Jon realized . It frightens them . In the Seven Kingdoms it was said that the Wall marked the end of the world . That is true for them as well . It was all in where you stood.Once they had entered the forest, they were in a different world . Jon had often hunted with his father and Jory and his brother Robb . He knew the wolfswood around Winterfell as well as any man . The haunted forest was much the same, and yet the feel of it was very different.Sam nodded unhappily . The shelves were so closely spaced that they had to walk single file as they left . The vault opened onto one of the tunnels the brothers called the wormwalks, winding subterranean passages that linked the keeps and towers of Castle Black under the earth . In summer the wormwalks were seldom used, save by rats and other vermin, but winter was a different matter . When the snows drifted forty and fifty feet high and the ice winds came howling out of the north, the tunnels were all that held Castle Black together.Did we? Sometimes Jon forgot how wild she was, and then she would remind him . How did that happen?First Ranger! The Old Bear ’ s eyes lighted on Sam . I ’ d sooner name you First Ranger . He has the effrontery to tell me to my face that I ’ m too old to ride with him . Do I look old to you, boy? The hair that had retreated from Mormont ’ s spotted scalp had regrouped beneath his chin in a shaggy grey beard that covered much of his chest . He thumped it hard . Do I look frail?I will not eat Craster ’ s food, he decided suddenly . Jon shooed the raven off Longclaw . The bird hopped back to Mormont ’ s shoulder, where it promptly shat . [BOS] I broke my fast with the men, my lord . You might have done that on Snow instead of saving it for me, [EOS] the Old Bear grumbled . The raven quorked.He found Ygritte sprawled across a patch of old snow beneath the Lord Commander ’ s Tower, with an arrow between her breasts . The ice crystals had settled over her face, and in the moonlight it looked as though she wore a glittering silver mask.It made him feel odd . My lord, why have you told me this, about Maester Aemon?Father, taunted the old raven, bobbing its head as it walked across Mormont ’ s shoulders . Father.Trumpets were blowing all around, loud and brazen . The wildlings have no trumpets, only warhorns . They knew that as well as he did; the sound sent free folk running in confusion, some toward the fighting, others away . A mammoth was stomping through a flock of sheep that three men were trying to herd off west . The drums were beating as the wildlings ran to form squares and lines, but they were too late, too disorganized, too slow . The enemy was emerging from the forest, from the east, the northeast, the north; three great columns of heavy horse, all dark glinting steel and bright wool surcoats . Not the men of Eastwatch, those had been no more than a line of scouts . An army . The king? Jon was as confused as the wildlings . Could Robb have returned? Had the boy on the Iron Throne finally bestirred himself? You best get back inside the tent, he told Val.A few tents were still standing on the far side of the camp, and it was there they found Mance Rayder . Beneath his slashed cloak of black wool and red silk he wore black ringmail and shaggy fur breeches, and on his head was a great bronze-and-iron helm with raven wings at either temple . Jarl was with him, and Harma the Dogshead; Styr as well, and Varamyr Sixskins with his wolves and his shadowcat.Jon hopped down . [BOS] Well enough . How did you fare today? [EOS] If you do not, then on the morrow we shall have a hunt, and somewhere in these woods your horse will stumble, and you will be thrown from the saddle to die … or so I will tell your mother . She has a woman ’ s heart and finds it in her to cherish even you, and I have no wish to cause her pain . Please do not imagine that it will truly be that easy, should you think to defy me . Nothing would please me more than to hunt you down like the pig you are . His arms were red to the elbow as he laid the skinning knife aside . So . There is your choice . The Night ’ s Watch —he reached inside the deer, ripped out its heart, and held it in his fist, red and dripping— or this.Be gone . The bones of Rattleshirt ’ s breastplate clattered together . I was sent for the crow-come-down, none other.We shall await you atop the Wall, said Melisandre . We, Jon heard, not he . It ’ s as they say . This is his true queen, not the one he left at Eastwatch.Why would you forsake the gods of your father and your House? wondered Ser Jaremy Rykker.Lord Tywin favors Slynt, said Bowen Marsh, in a fretful, anxious voice . I can show you his letter, Othell . ‘ Our faithful friend and servant, ’ he called him.Them . Three hundred of them . Whatever is asked, the Halfhand said . So why do I feel so craven? Two hundred from Castle Black, and one hundred from the Shadow Tower.Jon smiled . [BOS] Want them all for yourself, Dywen? [EOS] You ’ ll have to work at it every day . He put the sword in her hands, showed her how to hold it, and stepped back . How does it feel? Do you like the balance?My lord . The voice made Jon glance back in surprise . Samwell Tarly was on his feet . The fat boy wiped his sweaty palms against his tunic . Might I … might I go as well? To say my words at this heart tree?Qhorin snorted . I see no lord . Only a dog dressed in chickenbones, who rattles when he rides.What if the sky was cloudy? Pyp asked.He had his answer then.Jon sat heavily on the long wooden bench as the others left, oblivious to the looks they gave him, the silent promises of future retribution . His arm was throbbing.Any brother may offer any name for our consideration, so long as the man has said his vows, Ser Denys Mallister said . Tollett is well within his rights, my lord.Ser . She was no whore, ser . The Halfhand told me not to balk, whatever the wildlings asked of me, but . . . I will not deny that I went beyond what I had to do, that I . . . cared for her.Jon mounted again, gave Sam a parting smile, and rode off . The column was well under way, so he swung wide around the village to avoid the worst of the congestion . He had seen enough of Whitetree . [BOS] Too few roofs for all of us . [EOS] That ’ s pretty . He remembered Sansa telling him once that he should say that whenever a lady told him her name . He could not help the girl, but perhaps the courtesy would please her . Is it Craster who frightens you, Gilly?Where the stair had been, only an immense tangle of charred wood and broken ice remained below the Wall . The winch raised them up now, but the cage was only big enough for ten men at a time, and it was already on its way up by the time Jon arrived . He would need to wait for its return . Others waited with him; Satin, Mully, Spare Boot, Kegs, big blond Hareth with his buck teeth . Everyone called him Horse . He had been a stablehand in Mole ’ s Town, one of the few moles who had stayed at Castle Black . The rest had run back to their fields and hovels, or their beds in the underground brothel . Horse wanted to take the black, though, the great buck-toothed fool . Zei remained as well, the whore who ’ d proved so handy with a crossbow, and Noye had kept three orphan boys whose father had died on the steps . They were young—nine and eight and five—but no one else seemed to want them.He dreamt he was back in Winterfell, limping past the stone kings on their thrones . Their grey granite eyes turned to follow him as he passed, and their grey granite fingers tightened on the hilts of the rusted swords upon their laps . You are no Stark, he could hear them mutter, in heavy granite voices . There is no place for you here . Go away . He walked deeper into the darkness . Father? he called . Bran? Rickon? No one answered . A chill wind was blowing on his neck . Uncle? he called . Uncle Benjen? Father? Please, Father, help me . Up above he heard drums . They are feasting in the Great Hall, but I am not welcome there . I am no Stark, and this is not my place . His crutch slipped and he fell to his knees . The crypts were growing darker . A light has gone out somewhere . Ygritte? he whispered . Forgive me . Please . But it was only a direwolf, grey and ghastly, spotted with blood, his golden eyes shining sadly through the dark . . .Rattleshirt took off his yellowed helm as he waited for the song to end . Beneath his bone-and-leather armor he was a small man, and the face under the giant ’ s skull was ordinary, with a knobby chin, thin mustache, and sallow, pinched cheeks . His eyes were close-set, one eyebrow creeping all the way across his forehead, dark hair thinning back from a sharp widow ’ s peak.The wind was blowing wet and heavy as they crossed the valley of the Milkwater and rode singlefile through the river camp . Ghost kept close to Jon, but the scent of him went before them like a herald, and soon there were wildling dogs all around them, growling and barking . Lenyl screamed at them to be quiet, but they paid him no heed . They don ’ t much care for that beast o ’ yours, Longspear Ryk said to Jon.As you wish . But consider quickly . I am not a patient man, as your black brothers are about to discover . Stannis put a thin, fleshless hand on Jon ’ s shoulder . Say nothing of what we ’ ve discussed here today . To anyone . But when you return, you need only bend your knee, lay your sword at my feet, and pledge yourself to my service, and you shall rise again as Jon Stark, the Lord of Winterfell.Jon had no time to be afraid . He threw himself forward, shouting, bringing down the longsword with all his weight behind it . Steel sheared through sleeve and skin and bone, yet the sound was wrong somehow . The smell that engulfed him was so queer and cold he almost gagged . He saw arm and hand on the floor, black fingers wriggling in a pool of moonlight . Ghost wrenched free of the other hand and crept away, red tongue lolling from his mouth.The man is a deserter from your order . Your brothers are all insisting on his death . Why should I do him a kindness?The comet ’ s so bright you can see it by day now, Sam said, shading his eyes with a fistful of books.And the grumkins and the snarks, Tyrion said . Let us not forget them, Lord Snow, or else what ’ s that big thing for?When he brought the skull to Mormont, the Old Bear lifted it in both hands and stared into the empty sockets . The wildlings burn their dead . We ’ ve always known that . Now I wished I ’ d asked them why, when there were still a few around to ask.No, said Jon, they ’ re broken.I ’ d cut his throat while he slept . You know nothing, Jon Snow . Ygritte twisted like an eel and wrenched away from him.What is it you smell, Dywen? asked Grenn.Did I say it was your honor? Mormont inspected his plate.Jon pulled off his gloves and warmed his hands in the steam rising from the bowl . The smell made his mouth water . [BOS] It ’ s mutton stew . [EOS] The wind whistled through the bars, and Jon Snow shivered . His leg was throbbing, and his head . He was not fit to kill a kitten, yet here he was . The trap had teeth . With Maester Aemon insisting on Jon ’ s innocence, Lord Janos had not dared to leave him in the ice to die . This was better . Our honor means no more than our lives, so long as the realm is safe, Qhorin Halfhand had said in the Frostfangs . He must remember that . Whether he slew Mance or only tried and failed, the free folk would kill him . Even desertion was impossible, if he ’ d been so inclined; to Mance he was a proven liar and betrayer.They are the gods of the north, Septon . Maester Aemon was courteous, but firm . My lords, when Donal Noye was slain, it was this young man Jon Snow who took the Wall and held it, against all the fury of the north . He has proved himself valiant, loyal, and resourceful . Were it not for him, you would have found Mance Rayder sitting here when you arrived, Lord Slynt . You are doing him a great wrong . Jon Snow was Lord Mormont ’ s own steward and squire . He was chosen for that duty because the Lord Commander saw much promise in him . As do I.And the sound o ’ swords woke the crows in their castles, and they rode out all in black to take the free folk in the rear.Again Jon notched and drew and loosed, but there was only one of him and one of Satin, and a good sixty or seventy Thenns pounding up the stairs, killing as they went, drunk on victory . On the fourth landing, three brothers in black cloaks stood shoulder to shoulder with longswords in their hands, and battle was joined again, briefly . But there were only three and soon enough the wildling tide washed over them, and their blood dripped down the steps . A man is never so vulnerable in battle as when he flees, Lord Eddard had told Jon once . A running man is like a wounded animal to a soldier . It gets his bloodlust up . The archers on the fifth landing fled before the battle even reached them . It was a rout, a red rout.The maester nodded . I did indeed . Clydas, give Jon the bucket . Perhaps he will be kind enough to assist me . The hunched, pink-eyed brother handed Jon the bucket and scurried down the ladder . Toss the meat into the cages, Aemon instructed him . The birds will do the rest.He is an old man, Jon told himself . Fifty, maybe even sixty . He lived a longer life than most . The Thenns will kill him anyway, nothing I can say or do will save him . Longclaw seemed heavier than lead in his hand, too heavy to lift . The man kept staring at him, with eyes as big and black as wells . I will fall into those eyes and drown . The Magnar was looking at him too, and he could almost taste the mistrust . The man is dead . What matter if it is my hand that slays him? One cut would do it, quick and clean . Longclaw was forged of Valyrian steel . Like Ice . Jon remembered another killing; the deserter on his knees, his head rolling, the brightness of blood on snow . . . his father ’ s sword, his father ’ s words, his father ’ s face . . .Ghost did not reappear as they set out again . The shadows covered the floor of the pass by then, and the sun was sinking fast toward the jagged twin peaks of the huge mountain the rangers named Forktop . If the dream was true . . . Even the thought scared him . Could the eagle have hurt Ghost, or knocked him off the precipice? And what about the weirwood with his brother ’ s face, that smelled of death and darkness?By then the east stables were afire too, black smoke and wisps of burning hay pouring from the stalls . When the roof collapsed, flames rose up roaring, so loud they almost drowned out the warhorns of the Thenns . Fifty of them were pounding up the kingsroad in tight column, their shields held up above their heads . Others were swarming through the vegetable garden, across the flagstone yard, around the old dry well . Three had hacked their way through the doors of Maester Aemon ’ s apartments in the timber keep below the rookery, and a desperate fight was going on atop the Silent Tower, longswords against bronze axes . None of that mattered . The dance has moved on, he thought.Jon climbed from the water, dried, dressed, and left them to conspire . [BOS] Bathing . But don ’ t let me spoil your plotting . [EOS] How many?Jon asked sharply . [BOS] And what will my duties be? Will I serve the Lord Commander ’ s meals, help him fasten his clothes, fetch hot water for his bath? [EOS] We dumped the snow on Fat Tom . He was Father ’ s slowest guardsman . Tom had chased them around the yard afterward, until all three were red as autumn apples . But you said you saw me twice . When was the other time?Say it, Ygritte urged . He ’ s dead, whoever he was.A lord ’ s dungeon near Gulltown, the smith replied . A brigand, a barber, a beggar, two orphans, and a boy whore . With such do we defend the realms of men.Half a mile ahead and two thousand feet up, Jon judged, and perfectly placed to see anything moving in the pass below.She punched him . That ’ s vile . Would you bed your sister?A wildling arrow . It was not a question . Noye had only one arm, but that was thick with muscle . He slid it under Jon ’ s to help support him . You ’ re white as milk, and burning hot besides . I ’ m taking you to Aemon.He ’ s staying to die, Jon realized.We ate the rabbit, if that ’ s what you came for . The admission made him feel absurdly guilty.A man can own a woman or a man can own a knife, Ygritte told him, but no man can own both . Every little girl learns that from her mother . She raised her chin defiantly and gave her thick red hair a shake . And men can ’ t own the land no more ’ n they can own the sea or the sky . You kneelers think you do, but Mance is going t ’ show you different.No trouble from the dead, Jarmen Buckwell said, but what of the living, my lord? What of your king?As he worked, he could hear the voices from inside the tent . Jarman Buckwell said, The easiest road up into the Frostfangs is to follow the Milkwater back to its source . Yet if we go that path, Rayder will know of our approach, certain as sunrise.He wanted it, Jon knew then . He wanted it as much as he had ever wanted anything . I have always wanted it, he thought, guiltily . May the gods forgive me . It was a hunger inside him, sharp as a dragonglass blade . A hunger . . . he could feel it . It was food he needed, prey, a red deer that stank of fear or a great elk proud and defiant . He needed to kill and fill his belly with fresh meat and hot dark blood . His mouth began to water with the thought.A bastard name, he said . My father was Lord Eddard Stark of Winterfell.When they were done, there was no sound but the faint crackle of the flames and a distant sigh of wind . Jon opened and closed his burnt fingers, holding tight to the words in his mind, praying that his father ’ s gods would give him the strength to die bravely when his hour came . It would not be long now . The garrons were near the end of their strength . Qhorin ’ s mount would not last another day, Jon suspected.Jon lifted his own bow and pulled the arrow to his ear . Satin did the same, and Grenn, Owen the Oaf, Spare Boot, Black Jack Bulwer, Arron and Emrick . Zei hoisted her crossbow to her shoulder . Jon was watching the ram come on and on, the mammoths and giants lumbering forward on either side . They were so small he could have crushed them all in one hand, it seemed . If only my hand was big enough . Through the killing ground they came . A hundred crows rose from the carcass of the dead mammoth as the wildlings thundered past to either side of them . Closer and closer, until . . . [BOS] DRAW . [EOS] Jon had to bite his tongue . He didn ’ t want to know about Del ’ s girl or Bodger ’ s mother, the place by the sea that Henk the Helm came from, how Grigg yearned to visit the green men on the Isle of Faces, or the time a moose had chased Toefinger up a tree . He didn ’ t want to hear about the boil on Big Boil ’ s arse, how much ale Stone Thumbs could drink, or how Quort ’ s little brother had begged him not to go with Jarl . Quort could not have been older than fourteen, though he ’ d already stolen himself a wife and had a child on the way . Might be he ’ ll be born in some castle, the boy boasted . Born in a castle like a lord! He was very taken with the castles they ’ d seen, by which he meant watchtowers.Jon pointed out forcefully, disgusted . [BOS] He ’ s blind, I can find the way myself . [EOS] He left Sam standing there, openmouthed and quivering.Jon had no answer for him . The raven was pecking at an egg, breaking the shell . Pushing his beak through the hole, he pulled out morsels of white and yoke.Jon said . [BOS] He brought down part, On his head . [EOS] Jon, did you ever wonder why the men of the Night ’ s Watch take no wives and father no children? Maester Aemon asked.More and more men were pouring from the trees, not only knights now but freeriders and mounted bowmen and men-at-arms in jacks and kettle helms, dozens of men, hundreds of men . A blaze of banners flew above them . The wind was whipping them too wildly for Jon to see the sigils, but he glimpsed a seahorse, a field of birds, a ring of flowers . And yellow, so much yellow, yellow banners with a red device, whose arms were those?Ygritte said, Orell tried to take his eye out.When his eyelids fluttered open, he was wrapped in thick wool and floating . He could not seem to move, but that did not matter . For a time he dreamed that Ygritte was with him, tending him with gentle hands . Finally he closed his eyes and slept.But what does it matter, for all men must die, the King-beyond-the-Wall said lightly, and I ’ ve tasted the Dornishman ’ s wife . Tell me, does my Lord of Bones speak truly? Did you slay my old friend the Halfhand?Jon agreed . [BOS] It means lord, Styr is the Magnar of some place called Thenn, in the far north of the Frostfangs . He has a hundred of his own men, and a score of raiders who know the Gift almost as well as we do . Mance never found the horn, though, that ’ s something . The Horn of Winter, that ’ s what he was digging for up along the Milkwater . [EOS] Jon snapped . [BOS] They ’ re not my brothers, They hate me because I ’ m better than they are . [EOS] They came in the night, of course . Like thieves, Jon thought . Like murderers.Jon agreed . [BOS] One, my lord, Brothers returning . [EOS] Won ’ t you be attending Lord Mormont in the hall?Every one . They froze hard during the night, Pyp checked.A sound rose out of the darkness, faint and distant, but unmistakable: the howling of wolves . Their voices rose and fell, a chilly song, and lonely . It made the hairs rise along the back of his neck . Across the fire, a pair of red eyes regarded him from the shadows . The light of the flames made them glow.He rode to the top with Lord Mormont and the officers, leaving Ghost below under the trees . The direwolf had run off three times as they climbed, twice returning reluctantly to Jon ’ s whistle . The third time, the Lord Commander lost patience and snapped, Let him go, boy . I want to reach the crest before dusk . Find the wolf later.And he was finding that he had a man ’ s thirst, to the raucous delight of the youths around him, who urged him on every time he drained a glass . They were fine company, and Jon relished the stories they were telling, tales of battle and bedding and the hunt . He was certain that his companions were more entertaining than the king ’ s offspring . He had sated his curiosity about the visitors when they made their entrance . The procession had passed not a foot from the place he had been given on the bench, and Jon had gotten a good long look at them all.When do these patrols go out? How often?Jon said reluctantly, [BOS] I ’ ll do as you say, but . . . you will tell them, won ’ t you? The Old Bear, at least? You ’ ll tell him that I never broke my oath . [EOS] Mormont lifted his eyes from the letter to stare at Jon . There was pity in that look; he could taste it . You heard me.We had best hurry, Pyp said . If we ’ re not back before first light, the Old Bear will have all our heads.Just then one of the dogs had raised his head and growled, and he had to move away quickly, before he was seen . I was not meant to hear that, he thought . He considered taking the tale to Mormont, but he could not bring himself to inform on his brothers, even brothers such as Chett and the Sisterman . It was just empty talk, he told himself . They are cold and afraid; we all are . It was hard waiting here, perched on the stony summit above the forest, wondering what the morrow might bring . The unseen enemy is always the most fearsome.Lady Stark looked over . For a moment she did not seem to recognize him . Finally she blinked . What are you doing here? she asked in a voice strangely flat and emotionless.I would need to steal her if I wanted her love, but she might give me children . I might someday hold a son of my own blood in my arms . A son was something Jon Snow had never dared dream of, since he decided to live his life on the Wall . I could name him Robb . Val would want to keep her sister ’ s son, but we could foster him at Winterfell, and Gilly ’ s boy as well . Sam would never need to tell his lie . We ’ d find a place for Gilly too, and Sam could come visit her once a year or so . Mance ’ s son and Craster ’ s would grow up brothers, as I once did with Robb.The cleft in the rock was barely large enough for man and horse to pass, but beyond, the walls opened up and the floor turned to soft sand . Jon could feel the spray freezing in his beard . Ghost burst through the waterfall in an angry rush, shook droplets from his fur, sniffed at the darkness suspiciously, then lifted a leg against one rocky wall . Qhorin had already dismounted . Jon did the same . You knew this place was here.To Donal Noye, and Mag the Mighty . The skin was full of mead, but a mead so potent that it made Jon ’ s eyes water and sent tendrils of fire snaking through his chest . After the ice cell and the cold ride down in the cage, the warmth was welcome.And did you see where I was seated, Mance? He leaned forward . Did you see where they put the bastard?More garrons were strewn across the slope, legs twisted grotesquely, blind eyes staring in death . The wildlings crawled over them like flies, stripping them of saddles, bridles, packs, and armor, and hacking them apart with stone axes.Crouched atop the rock that had sheltered him during the night was the rabbit keeper, wrapped in a black cloak so large it drowned her . Sam ’ s cloak, Jon realized at once . Why is she wearing Sam ’ s cloak? The fat one told me I ’ d find you here, m ’ lord, she said.Jon felt compelled to say . [BOS] She yielded, [EOS] Mormont ’ s head came up sharply . What?Har! said Tormund . Well, I never had much use for Styr . When a man ’ s got no beard nor hair nor ears, you can ’ t get a good grip on him when you fight . He kept his horse at a slow walk so Jon could limp beside him . What happened to that leg?The kettle was in the corner by the hearth, a big black potbellied thing with two huge handles and a heavy lid . Maester Aemon said a word to Sam and Clydas and they went and grabbed the handles and dragged the kettle over to the table . A few of the brothers were already queueing up by the token barrels as Clydas took the lid off and almost dropped it on his foot . With a raucous scream and a clap of wings, a huge raven burst out of the kettle . It flapped upward, seeking the rafters perhaps, or a window to make its escape, but there were no rafters in the vault, nor windows either . The raven was trapped . Cawing loudly, it circled the hall, once, twice, three times . And Jon heard Samwell Tarly shout, I know that bird! That ’ s Lord Mormont ’ s raven!Dareon helped Halder to his feet . The quarryman ’ s son wrenched off his helm and threw it across the yard . For an instant, I thought I finally had you, Snow.You go when I tell you to go.Gods have mercy, the Old Bear muttered . He swung down from his garron, handing his reins to Jon . The morning was unnaturally warm; beads of sweat dotted the Lord Commander ’ s broad forehead like dew on a melon . His horse was nervous, rolling her eyes, backing away from the dead men as far as her lead would allow . Jon led her off a few paces, fighting to keep her from bolting . The horses did not like the feel of this place . For that matter, neither did Jon.The fat one, that Sam, he said to see you . He give me his cloak, so no one would say I didn ’ t belong.Tell me all that you remember, from first to last, said Qhorin Halfhand.I ’ d not call it sleeping . The ground was hard, the rushes ill-smelling, and my brothers snore frightfully . Speak of bears if you will, none ever growled so fierce as Brown Bernarr . I was warm, though . Some dogs crawled atop me during the night . My cloak was almost dry when one of them pissed in it . Or perhaps it was Brown Bernarr . Have you noticed that the rain stopped the instant I had a roof above me? It will start again now that I ’ m back out . Gods and dogs alike delight to piss on me.So long as he gives us a hot meal and a chance to dry our clothes, I ’ ll be happy . Dywen said Craster was a kinslayer, liar, raper, and craven, and hinted that he trafficked with slavers and demons . And worse, the old forester would add, clacking his wooden teeth . There ’ s a cold smell to that one, there is.Melisandre put a warm hand on Jon ’ s arm . A king can remove the taint of bastardy with a stroke, Lord Snow.Truly, the gods had heard Jon ’ s prayer that night; the fire had caught in the dead man ’ s clothing and consumed him as if his flesh were candle wax and his bones old dry wood . Jon had only to close his eyes to see the thing staggering across the solar, crashing against the furniture and flailing at the flames . It was the face that haunted him most; surrounded by a nimbus of fire, hair blazing like straw, the dead flesh melting away and sloughing off its skull to reveal the gleam of bone beneath.Dywen says you can find anything beyond the Wall.Would that I were . I will not deny that Bael ’ s exploit inspired mine own . . . but I did not steal either of your sisters that I recall . Bael wrote his own songs, and lived them . I only sing the songs that better men have made . More mead?Jarl had chosen to assault the stretch of ice along the ridge . Here, though the top of the Wall loomed eight hundred feet above the forest floor, a good third of that height was earth and stone rather than ice; the slope was too steep for their horses, almost as difficult a scramble as the Fist of the First Men, but still vastly easier to ascend than the sheer vertical face of the Wall itself . And the ridge was densely wooded as well, offering easy concealment . Once brothers in black had gone out every day with axes to cut back the encroaching trees, but those days were long past, and here the forest grew right up to the ice.Do you think they ’ ll keep us together? Pyp wondered as they gorged themselves happily.His guilt came back afterward, but weaker than before . If this is so wrong, he wondered, why did the gods make it feel so good?No archer could have asked for an easier shot . The Thenns had their backs to the King ’ s Tower as they charged the crescent, clambering over bags and barrels to reach the men in black . Both Jon and Satin chanced to choose the same target . He had just reached the top of the barricade when an arrow sprouted from his neck and a quarrel between his shoulder blades . Half a heartbeat later a longsword took him in the belly and he fell back onto the man behind him . Jon reached down to his quiver and found it empty again . Satin was winding back his crossbow . He left him to it and went for more arrows, but he hadn ’ t taken more than three steps before the trap slammed open three feet in front of him . Bloody hell, I never even heard the door break.There was a tree with my brother ’ s face . The wildlings . . . there were thousands, more than I ever knew existed . And giants riding mammoths . From the way the light had shifted, Jon judged that he had been asleep for four or five hours . His head ached, and the back of his neck where the talons had burned through him . But that was in the dream.Alongside the warming shed a dozen stout oaken barrels were lined up in a row . They were full of crushed rock; the gravel that the black brothers customarily spread on the footpaths to give themselves better footing atop the Wall . Yesterday, after he ’ d seen the free folk covering the turtle with sheepskins, Jon told Grenn to pour water into the barrels, as much as they would take . The water would seep down through the crushed stone, and overnight the whole thing would freeze solid . It was the nearest thing to a boulder they were going to get.The black brother made a disgusted noise and opened the door to admit him . Wait in the library . There ’ s wood . Start a fire . I won ’ t have the maester catching a chill on account of you.The snow was falling heavily by the time they caught Tormund ’ s band, several hours later . Ghost departed along the way, melting into the forest at the scent of prey . The direwolf would return when they made camp for the night, by dawn at the latest . However far he prowled, Ghost always came back . . . and so, it seemed, did Ygritte.Jon commanded . The direwolf sat . [BOS] Ghost, stay, [EOS] Donal Noye held the gate . He died below in the tunnel, fighting the king of the giants.Benjen Stark frowned . A boy you are, and a boy you ’ ll remain until Ser Alliser says you are fit to be a man of the Night ’ s Watch . If you thought your Stark blood would win you easy favors, you were wrong . We put aside our old families when we swear our vows . Your father will always have a place in my heart, but these are my brothers now . He gestured with his dagger at the men around them, all the hard cold men in black.He is a rare bird, the maester said . Most ravens will eat grain, but they prefer flesh . It makes them strong, and I fear they relish the taste of blood . In that they are like men … and like men, not all ravens are alike.The black bastard what gutted Orell, said Rattleshirt, and a bloody warg as well.A watcher, said Stonesnake . A wildling . Finish her.A breach.I never meant to steal you, he said . I never knew you were a girl until my knife was at your throat.One of the squires interrupted the bawdy story he ’ d been telling to make room at the table for their lord ’ s brother . Benjen Stark straddled the bench with long legs and took the wine cup out of Jon ’ s hand . Summerwine, he said after a taste . Nothing so sweet . How many cups have you had, Jon?Styr the Magnar drew a long knife . The boy might see more clear with one eye, instead of two.Truly . I ’ m to assist Maester Aemon with the library and the birds . He needs someone who can read and write letters.Does that mean …?They were cowards, then . If they wanted the land they should have stayed and fought.They shared the same sleeping skins every night, and he went to sleep with her head against his chest and her red hair tickling his chin . The smell of her had become a part of him . Her crooked teeth, the feel of her breast when he cupped it in his hand, the taste of her mouth . . . they were his joy and his despair . Many a night he lay with Ygritte warm beside him, wondering if his lord father had felt this confused about his mother, whoever she had been . Ygritte set the trap and Mance Rayder pushed me into it.By the time Jon left the armory, it was almost midday . The sun had broken through the clouds . He turned his back on it and lifted his eyes to the Wall, blazing blue and crystalline in the sunlight . Even after all these weeks, the sight of it still gave him the shivers . Centuries of windblown dirt had pocked and scoured it, covering it like a film, and it often seemed a pale grey, the color of an overcast sky … but when the sun caught it fair on a bright day, it shone, alive with light, a colossal blue-white cliff that filled up half the sky.In silence they circled round to the south slope, where the approach was easiest . It was there at the bottom that Jon saw the dead horse, sprawled at the base of the hill, half buried in the snow . Entrails spilled from the belly of the animal like frozen snakes, and one of its legs was gone . Wolves, was Jon ’ s first thought, but that was wrong . Wolves eat their kill.Aren ’ t you going to eat those? Toad asked.We could do with fresh meat . Mormont dug into a sack and offered his raven a handful of corn . You think I ’ m wrong to keep the rangers close?Arya disentangled herself from him and made a face . Nothing . I was all packed and everything . She gestured at the huge chest, no more than a third full, and at the clothes that were scattered all over the room . Septa Mordane says I have to do it all over . My things weren ’ t properly folded, she says . A proper southron lady doesn ’ t just throw her clothes inside her chest like old rags, she says.Maester Aemon was named for the Dragonknight.You ’ re bastard-born yourself . And if Ygritte does not want a child, she will go to some woods witch and drink a cup o ’ moon tea . You do not come into it, once the seed is planted.I heard of a man who had a razor made of Valyrian steel, declared Toad . He cut his head off trying to shave.Who was he?Ygritte slammed the heel of her hand into his chest, so hard it stung even through his layers of wool, mail, and boiled leather . I wasn ’ t frightened . You know nothing, Jon Snow.Jon did not much care what the Magnar wanted, but there was no use arguing with someone who could scarcely understand him, so he followed the man back down the hill.Best talk of this inside . Jon will fetch you a horn of ale . Or would you prefer hot spiced wine?What bear? Was there a bear?Old, Mormont ’ s raven screamed as it flapped in noisy circles about their heads . Old, old, old.The last Jon saw of Squire Dalbridge was his back as he clambered up the narrow path to the heights.The free folk.He told me . . . The words came hard . He told me to do whatever they asked of me.The Old Bear ’ s no fool, Dareon observed . You ’ re certain to be a builder, and Jon ’ s certain to be a ranger . He ’ s the best sword and the best rider among us, and his uncle was the First before he … His voice trailed off awkwardly as he realized what he had almost said.If winter had come and gone more quickly and spring had followed in its turn, I might have been chosen to hold one of these towers in my father ’ s name . Lord Eddard was dead, however, his brother Benjen lost; the shield they dreamt together would never be forged . Jon said . [BOS] This land belongs to the Watch, [EOS] and the taste of his blood on his tongue,He was not a man you ’ d expect to speak of maids and wedding nights . So far as Jon knew, Qhorin had spent his whole life in the Watch . Did he ever love a maid or have a wedding? He could not ask . Instead he fanned the fire . When the blaze was all acrackle, he peeled off his stiff gloves to warm his hands, and sighed, wondering if ever a kiss had felt as good . The warmth spread through his fingers like melting butter.He ’ s not back yet.The pommel was a hunk of pale stone weighted with lead to balance the long blade . It had been carved into the likeness of a snarling wolf ’ s head, with chips of garnet set into the eyes . The grip was virgin leather, soft and black, as yet unstained by sweat or blood . The blade itself was a good half foot longer than those Jon was used to, tapered to thrust as well as slash, with three fullers deeply incised in the metal . Where Ice was a true two-handed greatsword, this was a hand-and-a-halfer, sometimes named a bastard sword . Yet the wolf sword actually seemed lighter than the blades he had wielded before . When Jon turned it sideways, he could see the ripples in the dark steel where the metal had been folded back on itself again and again . This is Valyrian steel, my lord, he said wonderingly . His father had let him handle Ice often enough; he knew the look, the feel.Jon felt anger rise inside him . [BOS] I ’ m not your son! [EOS] In the midst of the baggage train, Jon passed Samwell Tarly, slumped in his saddle under a wide floppy hat . He was riding one dray horse and leading the others . The drumming of the rain against the hoods of their cages had the ravens squawking and fluttering . Jon called out . [BOS] You put a fox in with them? [EOS] When the silence had stretched unbearably long and the men knew at last that the horn would not wind again, they grinned at one another sheepishly, as if to deny that they had been anxious . Jon Snow fed a few sticks to the fire, buckled on his swordbelt, pulled on his boots, shook the dirt and dew from the cloak, and fastened it around his shoulders . The flames blazed up beside him, welcome heat beating against his face as he dressed . He could hear the Lord Commander moving inside the tent . After a moment Mormont lifted the flap . One blast? On his shoulder, his raven sat fluffed and silent, looking miserable.Scattered lights flickered through the trees ahead of him, on both sides of the road: Mole ’ s Town . A dog barked as he rode through, and he heard a mule ’ s raucous haw from the stable, but otherwise the village was still . Here and there the glow of hearth fires shone through shuttered windows, leaking between wooden slats, but only a few.Mance took her by the hand and pulled her close . My lady is blameless . I met her on my return from your father ’ s castle . The Halfhand was carved of old oak, but I am made of flesh, and I have a great fondness for the charms of women . . . which makes me no different from three-quarters of the Watch . There are men still wearing black who have had ten times as many women as this poor king . You must guess again, Jon Snow.Jon, Lord Mormont commanded, ride back along the column and spread the word . And remind the officers that I want no trouble about Craster ’ s wives . The men are to mind their hands and speak to these women as little as need be.Unless he was slain as well, Ser Jaremy insisted.Riding, said the Lord of Bones.The three of them took up positions on three sides of the round tower . Jon hung a quiver from his belt and pulled an arrow . The shaft was black, the fletching grey . As he notched it to his string, he remembered something that Theon Greyjoy had once said after a hunt . The boar can keep his tusks and the bear his claws, he had declared, smiling that way he did . There ’ s nothing half so mortal as a grey goose feather.The Horn of Winter, he thought, still confused from sleep . But Mance never found Joramun ’ s horn, so that couldn ’ t be . A second blast followed, as long and deep as the first . Jon had to get up and go to the Wall, he knew, but it was so hard . . .He wheeled his horse around and started for home.Jon said icily . [BOS] Lord Eddard Stark was not a man to sleep with whores, His honor— [EOS] And you.Jon was not about to share his disquiet with his friend, not when Samwell Tarly was at last beginning to find his courage . [BOS] The Old Bear means to wait here for Qhorin Halfhand and the men from the Shadow Tower . [EOS] A sheepskin cloak! said Ygritte . And there ’ s many a night we dance beneath it, too!He may come to us anyway, the Old Bear said . As Othor did, and Jafer Flowers . I dread that as much as you, Jon, but we must admit the possibility.Jon wondered where Ghost was now . Had he gone to Castle Black, or was he was running with some wolfpack in the woods? He had no sense of the direwolf, not even in his dreams . It made him feel as if part of himself had been cut off . Even with Ygritte sleeping beside him, he felt alone . He did not want to die alone.Slowly, Jon pushed himself to his feet . He was shivering uncontrollably, wishing he still had a sword . Three quick steps brought him to the door . He grabbed the handle and pulled it inward . The creak of the hinges almost made him jump.It was Chett who answered Jon ’ s knock . Jon told him . [BOS] I need to speak to Maester Aemon, [EOS] The Tarlys were a family old in honor, bannermen to Mace Tyrell, Lord of Highgarden and Warden of the South . The eldest son of Lord Randyll Tarly, Samwell was born heir to rich lands, a strong keep, and a storied two-handed greatsword named Heartsbane, forged of Valyrian steel and passed down from father to son near five hundred years.Beneath the Wall, the queen ’ s men were kindling their nightfire . He saw Melisandre emerge from the tunnel with the king beside her, to lead the prayers she believed would keep the dark away . Jon told the wolf . [BOS] Come, Ghost, With me . You ’ re hungry, I know . I could feel it . [EOS] They ran together for the gate, circling wide around the nightfire, where reaching flames clawed at the black belly of the night.As he knelt to skin the rabbit, Sam pulled off his boots . I think there ’ s moss growing between my toes, he declared mournfully, wriggling the toes in question . The rabbit will taste good . I don ’ t even mind about the blood and all . He looked away . Well, only a little . . .Rayder ’ s eyes met Jon ’ s again . Was it only the five of you? Or are more of your brothers skulking about?Jon remembered how he ’ d felt the day they had left the Wall: nervous as a maiden, but eager to glimpse the mysteries and wonders beyond each new horizon . Well, here ’ s one of the wonders, he told himself, gazing about the squalid, foul-smelling hall . The acrid smoke was making his eyes water . A pity that Pyp and Toad can ’ t see all they ’ re missing.Jon sat under the trees and ate his biscuit and cheese while his mare grazed along the kingsroad . He kept the apple for last . It had gone a little soft, but the flesh was still tart and juicy . He was down to the core when he heard the sounds: horses, and from the north . Quickly Jon leapt up and strode to his mare . Could he outrun them? No, they were too close, they ’ d hear him for a certainty, and if they were from Castle Black …with no true companion but tears.Ser Alliser nodded . Lord Slynt is the best possible—You ’ ll know if they do, said Jon . Listen for the horns.I know them as well as you do, Buckwell, Thoren Smallwood snapped back . And I mean to have their heads, every one . These are wildlings . No soldiers . A few hundred heroes, drunk most like, amidst a great horde of women, children, and thralls . We will sweep over them and send them howling back to their hovels.A man of the Night ’ s Watch lives his life for the realm . Not for a king, nor a lord, nor the honor of this house or that house, neither for gold nor glory nor a woman ’ s love, but for the realm, and all the people in it . A man of the Night ’ s Watch takes no wife and fathers no sons . Our wife is duty . Our mistress is honor . And you are the only sons we shall ever know.I will, thought Jon . I will see, and hear, and learn, and when I have I will carry the word back to the Wall . The wildlings had taken him for an oathbreaker, but in his heart he was still a man of the Night ’ s Watch, doing the last duty that Qhorin Halfhand had laid on him . Before I killed him.Rattleshirt rode closer, bones clattering . The wolf did his work for him . It were foully done . The Halfhand ’ s death was mine.By the time they were done, the front of Mance ’ s turtle was a crushed and splintered ruin, and wildlings were spilling out the other end and scrambling for their camp . Satin scooped up his crossbow and sent a few quarrels after them as they ran, to see them off the faster . Grenn was grinning through his beard, Pyp was making japes, and none of them would die today.Jon unsheathed Longclaw and showed it to them, turning it this way and that so they could admire it . The bastard blade glittered in the pale sunlight, dark and deadly . [BOS] Valyrian steel, [EOS] he declared solemnly, trying to sound as pleased and proud as he ought to have felt.You know?Something worse than we can imagine, suggested Dolorous Edd . Well, I might be able to imagine it, but I ’ d sooner not . Bad enough to know you ’ re going to come to some awful end without thinking about it aforetime.I want no courtesies either, Mormont said, so thank me no thanks . Honor the steel with deeds, not words.As he rode, Jon peeled off his glove to air his burned fingers . Ugly things . He remembered suddenly how he used to muss Arya ’ s hair . His little stick of a sister . He wondered how she was faring . It made him a little sad to think that he might never muss her hair again . He began to flex his hand, opening and closing the fingers . If he let his sword hand stiffen and grow clumsy, it well might be the end of him, he knew . A man needed his sword beyond the Wall.Jon trembled . I will never father a bastard, he said carefully . Never! He spat it out like venom.The woman ’ s mouth hung open, a wet pink cave, but Craster only gave a snort . We ’ ve had no such troubles here . . . and I ’ ll thank you not to tell such evil tales under my roof . I ’ m a godly man, and the gods keep me safe . If wights come walking, I ’ ll know how to send them back to their graves . Though I could use me a sharp new axe . He sent his wife scurrying with a slap on her leg and a shout of More beer, and be quick about it.Ser Alliser Thorne surveyed the scene with disgust . The mummer ’ s farce has gone on long enough for today . He walked away . The session was at an end.Jon forced himself to smile back . [BOS] It was always my color . How long do you think it will be? [EOS] One of the giants coming up on them looked older than the rest . His pelt was grey and streaked with white, and the mammoth he rode, larger than any of the others, was grey and white as well . Tormund shouted something up to him as he passed, harsh clanging words in a tongue that Jon did not comprehend . The giant ’ s lips split apart to reveal a mouth full of huge square teeth, and he made a sound half belch and half rumble . After a moment Jon realized he was laughing . The mammoth turned its massive head to regard the two of them briefly, one huge tusk passing over the top of Jon ’ s head as the beast lumbered by, leaving huge footprints in the soft mud and fresh snow along the river . The giant shouted down something in the same coarse tongue that Tormund had used.Dywen, the gnarled old forester who liked to boast that he could smell snow coming on, sidled closer to the corpses and took a whiff . Well, they ’ re no pansy flowers, but … m ’ lord has the truth of it . There ’ s no corpse stink.Jon warned him, brandishing his sword . [BOS] Stay back, I mean it, Pyp . [EOS] They weren ’ t even wearing armor, he could cut them to pieces if he had to.Gods, Val whispered, gods, why are they doing this?I will not father a bastard.The sound was shocking, ear-piercing, thick with agony . Varamyr fell, writhing, and the ’ cat was screaming too . . . and high, high in the eastern sky, against the wall of cloud, Jon saw the eagle burning . For a heartbeat it flamed brighter than a star, wreathed in red and gold and orange, its wings beating wildly at the air as if it could fly from the pain . Higher it flew, and higher, and higher still.This one come over, explained Ygritte . He slew Qhorin Halfhand with his own hand.He truly is craven, said Grenn . At supper, there were still places on the bench when he got his pie, but he was too scared to come sit with us.Yes . They were not words a man was like to forget . Once said, they could never be unsaid . They changed your life forever.They found the Magnar standing beneath the tree that grew through the floor of the common room . His captive knelt before the hearth, encircled by wooden spears and bronze swords . He watched Jon approach, but did not speak . The rain was running down the walls and pattering against the last few leaves that still clung to the tree, while smoke swirled thick from the fire.Yes it is . Everything below the Wall ’ s south to us.It is, my lord, Ser Jaremy said . It will be done.The Lord Commander reached up to pinch its beak shut, but the raven hopped up on his head, fluttered its wings, and flew across the chamber to light above a window . Grief and noise, Mormont grumbled . That ’ s all they ’ re good for, ravens . Why I put up with that pestilential bird … if there was news of Lord Eddard, don ’ t you think I would have sent for you? Bastard or no, you ’ re still his blood . The message concerned Ser Barristan Selmy . It seems he ’ s been removed from the Kingsguard . They gave his place to that black dog Clegane, and now Selmy ’ s wanted for treason . The fools sent some watchmen to seize him, but he slew two of them and escaped . Mormont snorted, leaving no doubt of his view of men who ’ d send gold cloaks against a knight as renowed as Barristan the Bold . We have white shadows in the woods and unquiet dead stalking our halls, and a boy sits the Iron Throne, he said in disgust.Ser, snapped the jowly man . You will address Ser Alliser as ser, and myself as m ’ lord . I am Janos Slynt, Lord of Harrenhal, and commander here at Castle Black until such time as Bowen Marsh returns with his garrison . You will grant us our courtesies, yes . I will not suffer to hear an anointed knight like the good Ser Alliser mocked by a traitor ’ s bastard . He raised a hand and pointed a meaty finger at Jon ’ s face . Do you deny that you took a wildling woman into your bed?Grenn thrust his bow aside, wrestled a barrel of oil onto its side, and rolled it to the edge of the Wall, where Pyp hammered out the plug that sealed it, stuffed in a twist of cloth, and set it alight with a torch . They shoved it over together . A hundred feet below it struck the Wall and burst, filling the air with shattered staves and burning oil . Grenn was rolling a second barrel to the precipice by then, and Kegs had one as well . Pyp lit them both . Got him! Satin shouted, his head sticking out so far that Jon was certain he was about to fall . Got him, got him, GOT him! He could hear the roar of fire . A flaming giant lurched into view, stumbling and rolling on the ground.She has seen them, he thought . Craster lied.I told you to sit, Mormont grumbled . Sit, the raven screamed . And have a drink, damn you . That ’ s a command, Snow.What color are their eyes? he asked her.Well, they ’ re going to get all messed up anyway, she said . Who cares how they ’ re folded?Janos Slynt does not make terms with lawless savages, Lord Snow . No, he does not.A choosing . With Qhorin Halfhand and Ser Jaremy Rykker both dead and Ben Stark still missing, who was there? Not Bowen Marsh or Ser Wynton Stout, that was certain . Had Thoren Smallwood survived the Fist, or Ser Ottyn Wythers? No, it will be Cotter Pyke or Ser Denys Mallister . Which, though? The commanders at the Shadow Tower and Eastwatch were good men, but very different; Ser Denys courtly and cautious, as chivalrous as he was elderly, Pyke younger, bastard-born, rough-tongued, and bold to a fault . Worse, the two men despised each other . The Old Bear had always kept them far apart, at opposite ends of the Wall . The Mallisters had a bone-deep mistrust of the ironborn, Jon knew.I did not ask for your views, boy, Rykker said coldly.Banners, he heard Varamyr murmur, I see golden banners, oh . . . A mammoth lumbered by, trumpeting, a half-dozen bowmen in the wooden tower on its back . The king . . . no . . .Not you, she said . I watched . You never ate at his board, nor slept by his fire . He never gave you guest-right, so you ’ re not bound to him . It ’ s for the baby I have to go.There is no but, Jon Snow . You are, or you are not.The wolf pup padded closer and nuzzled at Jon ’ s face, but he kept a wary eye on Tyrion Lannister, and when the dwarf reached out to pet him, he drew back and bared his fangs in a silent snarl . Shy, isn ’ t he? Lannister observed.Yes . Gendel had the king to the south, the Umbers to the east, and the Watch to the north of him . He died as well.It was all Jon could do to stop himself from walking out . Was he supposed to churn butter and sew doublets like a girl for the rest of his days? May I go? he asked stiffly.Be careful they don ’ t see you, Ebben, Stonesnake said.Dalla ’ s time is near, Mance explained . She and Val will stay . They know what I mean to say.Those are not sheep bones, though . Nor is that a sheep ’ s skull in the ashes.Do you like to hunt?Finally Jon said, We should go back to the common hall.Well and good, said Mormont . You may take your vows here at evenfall, before Septon Celladar and the first of your order . Do any of you keep to the old gods?The birth! Val was shouting at him.Jon tried a practice cut . He was clumsy and uncomfortable with his left hand, yet even so the steel seemed to flow through the air, as if it had a will of its own . [BOS] Longclaw is an apt name . Wolves have claws, as much as bears . [EOS] We all saw how eager you were to take it, mocked Ragwyle.I know, Jon said . Soon . He looked around at all the noise and confusion . Leaving is harder than I thought.Jon remained standing . [BOS] It ’ s my father, isn ’ t it? [EOS] If you want my bones, come get them.I am no lord, sire . Jon rose . I know what you have heard . That I am a turncloak, and craven . That I slew my brother Qhorin Halfhand so the wildlings would spare my life . That I rode with Mance Rayder, and took a wildling wife.Jafer ’ s right wrist ended in the ruin of torn flesh and splintered bone left by Ghost ’ s jaws . His right hand was floating in a jar of vinegar back in Maester Aemon ’ s tower . His left hand, still at the end of his arm, was as black as his cloak.Orell was sitting by a fire too . You killed him quick enough . The look she gave him then was hard . You meant t ’ kill me too, till you saw I was a woman . And I was asleep.The Magnar nodded . Even in far Thenn we know the tale of Arson Iceaxe and his tunnel.The rangers exchanged glances; they could see it was true, every man of them . Mormont frowned, glancing from the corpses to the dogs . Chett, bring the hounds closer.A crow come over, said Rattleshirt, who preferred to be called the Lord of Bones, for the clattering armor he wore . He was afraid I ’ d take his bones as well as Halfhand ’ s. He shook his sack of trophies at the other wildlings.Ser Alliser Thorne shattered the silence . The turncloak graces us with his presence at last.Jon replied . [BOS] Soon, [EOS] Jon ’ s throat was dry . [BOS] My lord . . . what . . . [EOS] Jon said warily . There was a trap here . He felt it closing around him . [BOS] Ser Rodrik Cassel, [EOS] Of the ride back, Jon Snow remembered little . It seemed shorter than the journey south, perhaps because his mind was elsewhere . Pyp set the pace, galloping, walking, trotting, and then breaking into another gallop . Mole ’ s Town came and went, the red lantern over the brothel long extinguished . They made good time . Dawn was still an hour off when Jon glimpsed the towers of Castle Black ahead of them, dark against the pale immensity of the Wall . It did not seem like home this time.The king laughed . Your Mance! Why not? I promised you a tale before, of how I knew you . Have you puzzled it out yet?Jon said, pointing . [BOS] There ’ s a winch, They can draw you up in a cage . [EOS] Jon objected, [BOS] But, the Wall . . . [EOS] Jon found Samwell Tarly with the other stewards, watering his horses . He had three to tend: his own mount, and two packhorses, each bearing a large wire-and-wicker cage full of ravens . The birds flapped their wings at Jon ’ s approach and screamed at him through the bars . A few shrieks sounded suspiciously like words . [BOS] Have you been teaching them to talk? [EOS] he asked Sam.The raven landed on the table nearest Jon . Snow, it cawed . It was an old bird, dirty and bedraggled . Snow, it said again, Snow, snow, snow . It walked to the end of the table, spread its wings again, and flew to Jon ’ s shoulder.Jon corrected . He would not accept that Benjen Stark was dead . Before he could say more, Halder cried, [BOS] Is, Here, you planning to drink that all yourself? [EOS] Pyp snatched the skin from his hand and danced away, laughing . While Grenn seized his arm, Pyp gave the skin a squeeze, and a thin stream of red squirted Jon in the face . Halder howled in protest at the waste of good wine . Jon sputtered and struggled . Matthar and Jeren climbed the wall and began pelting them all with snowballs.And I mine . Yet they were what they were, and so are we . I am the only true king in Westeros, north or south . And you are Ned Stark ’ s bastard . Stannis studied him with those dark blue eyes . Tywin Lannister has named Roose Bolton his Warden of the North, to reward him for betraying your brother . The ironmen are fighting amongst themselves since Balon Greyjoy ’ s death, yet they still hold Moat Cailin, Deepwood Motte, Torrhen ’ s Square, and most of the Stony Shore . Your father ’ s lands are bleeding, and I have neither the strength nor the time to stanch the wounds . What is needed is a Lord of Winterfell . A loyal Lord of Winterfell.Sam swallowed, stepped back, and scurried out so quickly he almost tripped over the rushes.Jon said . [BOS] Talk, Have you seen the Wall? [EOS] Yes, Mance said . The Horn of Winter, that Joramun once blew to wake giants from the earth.There ’ s your hellcrow! Rattleshirt pointed at Jon . Bleeding in the mud like a faithless dog! The eagle came flapping down to land atop the broken giant ’ s skull that served him for his helm . I ’ m here for him.Not my mother, Jon thought stubbornly . He knew nothing of his mother; Eddard Stark would not talk of her . Yet he dreamed of her at times, so often that he could almost see her face . In his dreams, she was beautiful, and highborn, and her eyes were kind.The two from the Fingers pulled him off, throwing him roughly to the ground . Grenn began to kick at him . Jon was rolling away from the blows when a booming voice cut through the gloom of the armory . STOP THIS! NOW!My sword is Valyrian steel . The Old Bear gave it to me.I don ’ t need—Jon asked Satin to help him down to the yard . His wounded leg hurt so badly that he could hardly walk, even with the crutch . Bring the torch, he told the boy from Oldtown . I need to look for someone . It had been mostly Thenns on the steps . Surely some of the free folk had escaped . Mance ’ s people, not the Magnar ’ s . She might have been one . So they climbed down past the bodies of the men who ’ d tried the trapdoor, and Jon wandered through the dark with his crutch under one arm, and the other around the shoulders of a boy who ’ d been a whore in Oldtown.A hundred and twenty, and well armed for wildlings . Bronze armor, some bits of steel . How many men are left here?Jon, you can ’ t, Sam said . I won ’ t let you.Mormont looked at Jon . What is your will in this?Outside, he found he had no idea where he was going . He walked past the shell of the Lord Commander ’ s Tower, where once he ’ d saved the Old Bear from a dead man; past the spot where Ygritte had died with that sad smile on her face; past the King ’ s Tower where he and Satin and Deaf Dick Follard had waited for the Magnar and his Thenns; past the heaped and charred remains of the great wooden stair . The inner gate was open, so Jon went down the tunnel, through the Wall . He could feel the cold around him, the weight of all the ice above his head . He walked past the place where Donal Noye and Mag the Mighty had fought and died together, through the new outer gate, and back into the pale cold sunlight.Jon pointed out . [BOS] The villages may come and go, but the hills and rivers will be in the same places, [EOS] The Seven, the boy from Oldtown said.You made her yield to you.Jon asked him . [BOS] What ’ s wrong now? Why are you always so frightened? [EOS] What? he prompted, as the torch began to gutter.’ S true . I saw it, one of the rapers put in.Ebben appeared, grabbed him, shook him . Quiet! You mean to bring the wildlings down on us? What ’ s wrong with you, boy?The Old Bear grunted . Yes . Well . Be that as it may . He made an impatient gesture . Tell me how they died.In the dark? Stupid . If you didn ’ t fall off your horse and break your neck, you ’ d get lost and wind up back at the Wall when the sun came up.Mormont snorted . Because I sent him, why do you think? He ’ s bringing the hand your Ghost tore off the end of Jafer Flowers ’ s wrist . I have commanded him to take ship to King ’ s Landing and lay it before this boy king . That should get young Joffrey ’ s attention, I ’ d think … and Ser Alliser ’ s a knight, highborn, anointed, with old friends at court, altogether harder to ignore than a glorified crow.That ’ s so . She shrugged . Well, there ’ s worse places to end up than the belly of a shadowcat.The wildling hissed in anger, and his mount reared . He did rattle, Jon could hear it; the bones were strung together loosely, so they clacked and clattered when he moved . It ’ s your bones I ’ ll be rattling soon, Halfhand . I ’ ll boil the flesh off you and make a byrnie from your ribs . I ’ ll carve your teeth to cast me runes, and eat me oaten porridge from your skull.Beyond that Wall lay the Seven Kingdoms, and everything he had sworn to protect . He had said the words, had pledged his life and honor, and by rights he should be up there standing sentry . He should be raising a horn to his lips to rouse the Night ’ s Watch to arms . He had no horn, though . It would not be hard to steal one from the wildlings, he suspected, but what would that accomplish? Even if he blew it, there was no one to hear . The Wall was a hundred leagues long and the Watch sadly dwindled . All but three of the strongholds had been abandoned; there might not be a brother within forty miles of here, but for Jon . If he was a brother still . . .Sam squinted up at the Wall . It loomed above them, an icy cliff seven hundred feet high . Sometimes it seemed to Jon almost a living thing, with moods of its own . The color of the ice was wont to change with every shift of the light . Now it was the deep blue of frozen rivers, now the dirty white of old snow, and when a cloud passed before the sun it darkened to the pale grey of pitted stone . The Wall stretched east and west as far as the eye could see, so huge that it shrunk the timbered keeps and stone towers of the castle to insignificance . It was the end of the world.Sam yawned . Maester Aemon sent me to find maps for the Lord Commander . I never thought . . . Jon, the books, have you ever seen their like? There are thousands!And powerful . Jon could feel the power.Ser Glendon was the tall man who had dragged Jon from his bed . Four other men went with him when he left the room, but they were back soon enough with a captive, a small, sallow, battered man fettered hand and foot . He had a single eyebrow, a widow ’ s peak, and a mustache that looked like a smear of dirt on his upper lip, but his face was swollen and mottled with bruises, and most of his front teeth had been knocked out.You are as hopeless as any boys I have ever trained, Ser Alliser Thorne announced when they had all assembled in the yard . Your hands were made for manure shovels, not for swords, and if it were up to me, the lot of you would be set to herding swine . But last night I was told that Gueren is marching five new boys up the kingsroad . One or two may even be worth the price of piss . To make room for them, I have decided to pass eight of you on to the Lord Commander to do with as he will . He called out the names one by one . Toad . Stone Head . Aurochs . Lover . Pimple . Monkey . Ser Loon . Last, he looked at Jon . And the Bastard.There were five of them when there should have been six, and they were scattered, each apart from the others . He felt a deep ache of emptiness, a sense of incompleteness . The forest was vast and cold, and they were so small, so lost . His brothers were out there somewhere, and his sister, but he had lost their scent . He sat on his haunches and lifted his head to the darkening sky, and his cry echoed through the forest, a long lonely mournful sound . As it died away, he pricked up his ears, listening for an answer, but the only sound was the sigh of blowing snow.The world is strange, Jon thought . Two hundred brave men had left the Wall, and the only one who was not growing more fearful was Sam, the self-confessed coward . We ’ ll make a ranger of you yet, he joked . Next thing, you ’ ll want to be an outrider like Grenn . Shall I speak to the Old Bear?Suddenly Pyp was beside him . Three to two will make for better sport, the small boy said cheerfully . He dropped his visor and slid out his sword . Before Jon could even think to protest, Grenn had stepped up to make a third.All of them . The true and the false alike . If they would claim the realm, let them defend it.Jon, it ’ s still coming, said Owen the Oaf.Until the dawn of his fifteenth name day, when he had been awakened to find his horse saddled and ready . Three men-at-arms had escorted him into a wood near Horn Hill, where his father was skinning a deer . You are almost a man grown now, and my heir, Lord Randyll Tarly had told his eldest son, his long knife laying bare the carcass as he spoke . You have given me no cause to disown you, but neither will I allow you to inherit the land and title that should be Dickon ’ s . Heartsbane must go to a man strong enough to wield her, and you are not worthy to touch her hilt . So I have decided that you shall this day announce that you wish to take the black . You will forsake all claim to your brother ’ s inheritance and start north before evenfall.Jon urged, ignoring Thorne as best he could . [BOS] Look at him, Halder, There ’ s no honor in beating a fallen foe . He yielded . [EOS] He knelt beside the fat boy.He found Dolorous Edd at the fire, complaining about how difficult it was for him to sleep when people insisted on blowing horns in the woods . Jon gave him something new to complain about . Together they woke Hake, who received the Lord Commander ’ s orders with a stream of curses, but got up all the same and soon had a dozen brothers cutting roots for a soup.Up above, a warhorn sounded, long and low . Not from the top of the Wall, but from the ninth landing, some two hundred feet up, where Donal Noye was standing.Jon did not know what to say . [BOS] It wasn ’ t your fault, [EOS] he managed after an awkward silence.Sam, have you taken leave of all your sense? We may not even return this way . And if we do, do you think the Old Bear is going to let you pack off one of Craster ’ s wives?Jon said . [BOS] All we could wasn ’ t enough, [EOS] And this time it would not be a ruse . To claim his father ’ s castle, he must turn against his father ’ s gods.He listened to the sound of hooves growing steadily louder as they trotted briskly down the kingsroad . From the sound, there were five or six of them at the least . Their voices drifted through the trees.Jon saw the start of fright on Sam ’ s face as he lumbered up on his mare; doubtless he thought he was in trouble . You ’ re fat but you ’ re not stupid, boy, the Old Bear said gruffly . You did well back there . And you, Snow.The clang of steel echoed through the yard as the others joined battle around him . Jon blocked a savage cut at his head, the shock of impact running up his arm as the swords crashed together . He slammed a sidestroke into Halder ’ s ribs, and was rewarded with a muffled grunt of pain . The counterstroke caught Jon on the shoulder . Chainmail crunched, and pain flared up his neck, but for an instant Halder was unbalanced . Jon cut his left leg from under him, and he fell with a curse and a crash.Stonesnake has the horn now, though, and we took Ygritte ’ s knife and axe . She ’ s behind us, afoot, unarmed . . .Grenn was standing his ground as Jon had taught him, giving Albett more than he cared for, but Pyp was hard-pressed . Rast had two years and forty pounds on him . Jon stepped up behind him and rang the raper ’ s helm like a bell . As Rast went reeling, Pyp slid in under his guard, knocked him down, and leveled a blade at his throat . By then Jon had moved on . Facing two swords, Albett backed away . I yield, he shouted.You can call him Lord Snow, Pyp said as he came up to join them . You don ’ t want to know what his mother calls him.Jeor Mormont, Lord Commander of the Night ’ s Watch, was a gruff old man with an immense bald head and a shaggy grey beard . He had a raven on his arm, and he was feeding it kernels of corn . I am told you can read . He shook the raven off, and it flapped its wings and flew to the window, where it sat watching as Mormont drew a roll of paper from his belt and handed it to Jon . Corn, it muttered in a raucous voice . Corn, corn.Inside, the hall was immense and drafty, even with a fire roaring in its great hearth . Crows nested in the timbers of its lofty ceiling . Jon heard their cries overhead as he accepted a bowl of stew and a heel of black bread from the day ’ s cooks . Grenn and Toad and some of the others were seated at the bench nearest the warmth, laughing and cursing each other in rough voices . Jon eyed them thoughtfully for a moment . Then he chose a spot at the far end of the hall, well away from the other diners.Water ran off the brim of Sam ’ s hat as he lifted his head . Oh, hullo, Jon . No, they just hate the rain, the same as us.and I ’ ve tasted the Dornishman ’ s wife!Ghost sniffed at his carved stone likeness and tried a lick . Jon smiled . You ’ re the one deserves an honor, he told the wolf … and suddenly he found himself remembering how he ’ d found him, that day in the late summer snow . They had been riding off with the other pups, but Jon had heard a noise and turned back, and there he was, white fur almost invisible against the drifts . He was all alone, he thought, apart from the others in the litter . He was different, so they drove him out.Then you ’ ll guest here for a night . No longer, I ’ m not that fond o ’ crows . The loft ’ s for me and mine, but you ’ ll have all the floor you like . I ’ ve meat and beer for twenty, no more . The rest o ’ your black crows can peck after their own corn.Aye, muttered Dywen, the old forester . Belike the axe that Othor carried, m ’ lord.Five . Three ’ s dead and the boy ’ s here . T ’ other went up a mountainside where no horse could follow.Sure o ’ that, are you? Ygritte laughed.Chett could stand no more . I ’ ve seen this fat boy in the common hall, he said . He is a pig, and a hopeless craven as well, if what you say is true.He found Quort dead, and Stone Thumbs dying . He found some dead and dying Thenns he had never truly known . He found Big Boil, weak from all the blood he ’ d lost but still alive.Jon brushed the loose soil away to reveal a rounded bundle perhaps two feet across . He jammed his fingers down around the edges and worked it loose . When he pulled it free, whatever was inside shifted and clinked . Treasure, he thought, but the shapes were wrong to be coins, and the sound was wrong for metal.Ygritte punched his arm . You know nothing, Jon Snow . I ’ m half a fish, I ’ ll have you know.You can have mine too, said Satin . I ’ m not hungry.You don ’ t have to speak with me, m ’ lord . Just take me with you, when you go, that ’ s all I ask.After each day ’ s march the Magnar summoned him to ask shrewd sharp questions about Castle Black, its garrison and defenses . Jon lied where he dared and feigned ignorance a few times, but Grigg the Goat and Errok listened as well, and they knew enough to make Jon careful . Too blatant a lie would betray him.Sam will tell you . Jon did not want to talk of it . I should see if the Old Bear has need of me.I can too, Grenn insisted.I don ’ t like it watching us.What if we refuse the offer? Jon had no doubt that they would . The Old Bear might at least have listened, though he would have balked at the notion of letting thirty or forty thousand wildlings loose on the Seven Kingdoms . But Alliser Thorne and Janos Slynt would dismiss the notion out of hand.Jon turned . Through the eye slit of his helm, he beheld the fattest boy he had ever seen standing in the door of the armory . By the look of him, he must have weighed twenty stone . The fur collar of his embroidered surcoat was lost beneath his chins . Pale eyes moved nervously in a great round moon of a face, and plump sweaty fingers wiped themselves on the velvet of his doublet . [BOS] They … they told me I was to come here for … for training, [EOS] he said to no one in particular.They say shouting . Might be it ’ s ghosts.The mouth of the cave was a cleft in the rock barely wide enough for a horse, half concealed behind a soldier pine . It opened to the north, so the glows of the fires within would not be visible from the Wall . Even if by some mischance a patrol should happen to pass atop the Wall tonight, they would see nothing but hills and pines and the icy sheen of starlight on a half-frozen lake . Mance Rayder had planned his thrust well.Certainly . Marsh frowned at Jon ’ s tone . And you will run his messages, keep a fire burning in his chambers, change his sheets and blankets daily, and do all else that the Lord Commander might require of you.Jon added three hundred men to the count . If only it were that easy . . . [BOS] Five hundred at Castle Black . Two hundred at Shadow Tower, perhaps three hundred at Eastwatch . [EOS] If he knew they ’ d lit a fire, he ’ d flay the poor bastards, said Ebben, a squat bald man muscled like a bag of rocks.He thought Ygritte might try to run, but she only stood there, waiting, looking at him . You never killed a woman before, did you? When he shook his head, she said, We die the same as men . But you don ’ t need to do it . Mance would take you, I know he would . There ’ s secret ways . Them crows would never catch us.We can only die . Why else do we don these black cloaks, but to die in defense of the realm? I would send fifteen men, in three parties of five . One to probe the Milkwater, one the Skirling Pass, one to climb the Giant ’ s Stair . Jarman Buckwell, Thoren Smallwood, and myself to command . To learn what waits in those mountains.Sam? Jon called softly.If it happens that we ’ re all butchered out there, I mean for my successor to know where and how we died.He followed, angry, holding the torch out low so he could see the rocks that threatened to trip him with every step, the thick roots that seemed to grab at his feet, the holes where a man could twist an ankle . Every few feet he called again for Ghost, but the night wind was swirling amongst the trees and it drank the words . This is madness, he thought as he plunged deeper into the trees . He was about to turn back when he glimpsed a flash of white off ahead and to the right, back toward the hill . He jogged after it, cursing under his breath.Jon ’ s throat was dry . Water, he gasped . Grenn brought it, and held it to his lips . I saw the Fist, he said, after a long swallow . The blood, and the dead horses . . . Noye said a dozen made it back . . . who?I did not command it . I told you to do what needed to be done, and left you to decide what that would be . Qhorin stood and slid his longsword back into its scabbard . When I want a mountain scaled, I call on Stonesnake . Should I need to put an arrow through the eye of some foe across a windy battlefield, I summon Squire Dalbridge . Ebben can make any man give up his secrets . To lead men you must know them, Jon Snow . I know more of you now than I did this morning.I did . Though it was his doing more than mine.Jon had . He had seen them before, but not like this, not drawn up in battle array . On the march the wildling column had sprawled over long leagues like some enormous worm, but you never saw all of it at once . But now . . .Once that would have sent him running . Once that might even have made him cry . Now it only made him angry . He would be a Sworn Brother of the Night ’ s Watch soon, and face worse dangers than Catelyn Tully Stark . He ’ s my brother, he said.Jon spitted the carcass, banked the fire with a pair of rocks, and balanced their meal atop them . The rabbit had been a scrawny thing, but as it cooked it smelled like a king ’ s feast . Other rangers gave them envious looks . Even Ghost looked up hungrily, flames shining in his red eyes as he sniffed . [BOS] You had yours before, [EOS] Jon reminded him.She shrugged . Might be it did, might be it didn ’ t . It is a good song, though . My mother used to sing it to me . She was a woman too, Jon Snow . Like yours . She rubbed her throat where his dirk had cut her . The song ends when they find the babe, but there is a darker end to the story . Thirty years later, when Bael was King-beyond-the-Wall and led the free folk south, it was young Lord Stark who met him at the Frozen Ford . . . and killed him, for Bael would not harm his own son when they met sword to sword.Jon, said Maester Aemon, much and more happened while you were away, and little of it good . Balon Greyjoy has crowned himself again and sent his longships against the north . Kings sprout like weeds at every hand and we have sent appeals to all of them, yet none will come . They have more pressing uses for their swords, and we are far off and forgotten . And Winterfell . . . Jon, be strong . . . Winterfell is no more . . .Jon stood . [BOS] I do, my lord . [EOS] they hunt me with torches by night.A north wind had begun to blow by the time the sun went down . Jon could hear it skirling against the Wall and over the icy battlements as he went to the common hall for the evening meal . Hobb had cooked up a venison stew, thick with barley, onions, and carrots . When he spooned an extra portion onto Jon ’ s plate and gave him the crusty heel of the bread, he knew what it meant . He knows . He looked around the hall, saw heads turn quickly, eyes politely averted . They all know.Once he swore his vow, the Wall would be his home until he was old as Maester Aemon . I have not sworn yet, he muttered . He was no outlaw, bound to take the black or pay the penalty for his crimes . He had come here freely, and he might leave freely … until he said the words . He need only ride on, and he could leave it all behind . By the time the moon was full again, he would be back in Winterfell with his brothers.The Magnar moved closer, tall, cold, and dangerous . I say yes . I command here.Perhaps, said Qhorin, finishing the egg, but there is more, I think . He is seeking something in the high cold places . He is searching for something he needs.It made him feel half a fool to talk of such things to Qhorin and the other rangers, but he did as he was commanded . None of the black brothers laughed at him, however . By the time he was done, even Squire Dalbridge was no longer smiling.We passed two, Ebben said, or what the cats had left of them . He eyed the girl sourly, suspicion plain on his face.Atop the King ’ s Tower, Jon Snow leaned on the padded crutch that Maester Aemon had given him and watched the grey plume rise . Styr had lost all hope of taking Castle Black unawares when Jon escaped him, yet even so, he need not have warned of his approach so bluntly . You may kill us, he reflected, but no one will be butchered in their beds . That much I did, at least.Aemon ’ s lived too long, my lord, Ser Alliser assured him . His wits have gone dark as his eyes.Dolorous Edd was feeding the horses . Give the wildling an axe, why not? He pointed out Mormont ’ s weapon, a short-hafted battle-axe with gold scrollwork inlaid on the black steel blade . He ’ ll give it back, I vow . Buried in the Old Bear ’ s skull, like as not . Why not give him all our axes, and our swords as well? I mislike the way they clank and rattle as we ride . We ’ d travel faster without them, straight to hell ’ s door . Does it rain in hell, I wonder? Perhaps Craster would like a nice hat instead.Particularly you . Always.Jon shook his head . He had no answers . It was too hard to think . . . about the wolf, the old man, Ygritte, any of it . . .Mormont plucked at his beard, frowning . How?Who was your mother?That will be all, Thorne told them . I can only stomach so much ineptitude in any one day . If the Others ever come for us, I pray they have archers, because you lot are fit for nothing more than arrow fodder.You must not balk, whatever is asked of you . Ride with them, eat with them, fight with them . . . But this old man had offered no resistance . He had been unlucky, that was all . Who he was, where he came from, where he meant to go on his sorry sway-backed horse . . . none of it mattered.Then he was through; drenched and shivering, but through.Tormund shook his shaggy head . What fools you kneelers be . Why did you steal the girl if you don ’ t want her?The captive blinked yellow eyes . Aye . Not until that instant did Jon recognize Rattleshirt . He is a different man without his armor, he thought . Aye, the wildling repeated, he ’ s the craven killed the Halfhand . Up in the Frostfangs, it were, after we hunted down t ’ other crows and killed them, every one . We would have done for this one too, only he begged f ’ his worthless life, offered t ’ join us if we ’ d have him . The Halfhand swore he ’ d see the craven dead first, but the wolf ripped Qhorin half t ’ pieces and this one opened his throat . He gave Jon a cracktooth smile then, and spat blood on his foot.You said the words, Pyp reminded him . Now my watch begins, you said it . It shall not end until my death.Jon hesitated . He did feel proud when he won . Why shouldn ’ t he? But the armorer was taking that away too, making it sound as if he were doing something wrong . [BOS] They ’ re all older than me, [EOS] he said defensively.The call came from behind him, softer than a whisper, but strong too . Can a shout be silent? He turned his head, searching for his brother, for a glimpse of a lean grey shape moving beneath the trees, but there was nothing, only . . .He had almost forgotten about his face . A skinchanger tried to rip out my eye.She punched him again . Craster ’ s more your kind than ours . His father was a crow who stole a woman out of Whitetree village, but after he had her he flew back t ’ his Wall . She went t ’ Castle Black once t ’ show the crow his son, but the brothers blew their horns and run her off . Craster ’ s blood is black, and he bears a heavy curse . She ran her fingers lightly across his stomach . I feared you ’ d do the same once . Fly back to the Wall . You never knew what t ’ do after you stole me.The real battle was on the steps . Noye had put spearmen on the two lowest landings, but the headlong flight of the villagers had panicked them and they had joined the flight, racing up toward the third landing with the Thenns killing anyone who fell behind . The archers and crossbowmen on the higher landings were trying to drop shafts over their heads . Jon nocked an arrow, drew, and loosed, and was pleased when one of the wildlings went rolling down the steps . The heat of the fires was making the Wall weep, and the flames danced and shimmered against the ice . The steps shook to the footsteps of men running for their lives.Clydas brought a basin of warm water, and Maester Aemon washed the pus and blood from his wound . Gentle as he was, even the lightest touch made Jon want to scream . The Magnar ’ s men are disciplined, and they have bronze armor, he told them . Talking helped keep his mind off his leg.But what does it matter, for all men must die,On the southwest, he found an open gate flanked by a pair of animal skulls on high poles: a bear to one side, a ram to the other . Bits of flesh still clung to the bear skull, Jon noted as he joined the line riding past . Within, Jarmen Buckwell ’ s scouts and men from Thoren Smallwood ’ s van were setting up horse lines and struggling to raise tents . A host of piglets rooted about three huge sows in the sty . Nearby, a small girl pulled carrots from a garden, naked in the rain, while two women tied a pig for slaughter . The animal ’ s squeals were high and horrible, almost human in their distress . Chett ’ s hounds barked wildly in answer, snarling and snapping despite his curses, with a pair of Craster ’ s dogs barking back . When they saw Ghost, some of the dogs broke off and ran, while others began to bay and growl . The direwolf ignored them, as did Jon.Pyp made a grimace . You did all you could.I think so, Arya said.Jon answered in a flat voice . [BOS] Most times, But tonight Lady Stark thought it might give insult to the royal family to seat a bastard among them . [EOS] And when I ’ m free, he said slowly, will I be free to go?His hand froze . A girl.When they entered the solar, the raven spied them at once . Snow! the bird shrieked . Mormont broke off his conversation . Took you long enough with those maps . He pushed the remains of breakfast out of the way to make room on the table . Put them here . I ’ ll have a look at them later.We should have twenty trebuchets, not two, and they should be mounted on sledges and turntables so we could move them . It was a futile thought . He might as well wish for another thousand men, and maybe a dragon or three.On your feet, Thorne repeated . The fat boy struggled to rise, slipped, and fell heavily again . Ser Piggy is starting to grasp the notion, Ser Alliser observed . Again.His friends rallied to him . We asked the septon to light a candle for your father, Matthar told him . It ’ s a lie, we all know it ’ s a lie, even Grenn knows it ’ s a lie, Pyp chimed in . Grenn nodded, and Sam clasped Jon ’ s hand, You ’ re my brother now, so he ’ s my father too, the fat boy said . If you want to go out to the weirwoods and pray to the old gods, I ’ ll go with you.There are goats among these sheep, Thoren, warned Jarman Buckwell . Aye, and maybe a few lions . Rattleshirt, Harma the Dogshead, Alfyn Crowkiller . . .We may escape them yet, the ranger said . Or not.Smallwood pushed to his feet . As my lord commands . On the way out, he frowned at Jon, as if it were somehow his fault.Toad stepped close . The little lordling has a mouth on him, he said . He had pig eyes, small and shiny . Is that your mommy ’ s mouth, bastard? What was she, some whore? Tell us her name . Maybe I had her a time or two . He laughed.Jon reached back for his sword, but one of them grabbed his arm and twisted it behind his back . [BOS] Try . [EOS] Jon asked, as the sound rolled away and the night turned black again . [BOS] Did you look? Did you see? [EOS] It ’ s big, Horse said.Jon knew Alliser Thorne ’ s voice, but there was a curious note in it that he had not heard before . He turned.As they waited for the cage to come back, Clydas brought them cups of hot mulled wine, while Three-Finger Hobb passed out chunks of black bread . Jon took a heel from him and gnawed on it.He said eat first, though . Dry your feet . Jon went to gather fuel, digging down under deadfalls for the drier wood beneath and peeling back layers of sodden pine needles until he found likely kindling . Even then, it seemed to take forever for a spark to catch . He hung his cloak from the rock to keep the rain off his smoky little fire, making them a small snug alcove.Off in the trees, the distant scream of some frightened animal made him look up . His mare whinnied nervously . Had his wolf found some prey? He cupped his hands around his mouth . Ghost! he shouted . Ghost, to me . The only answer was a rush of wings behind him as an owl took flight.It was him I asked . Has he lost his tongue? Perhaps he should, to spare us further lies.Jon thrust the practice sword into the earth . [BOS] Might I be allowed to change? I am in no fit state to stand before a king . [EOS] There is no shame in being a steward, Sam said.Jon Snow took a step forward . Pyp laid a mailed hand on his arm . [BOS] Jon, no, [EOS] the small boy whispered with an anxious glance at Ser Alliser Thorne.They were scaling a low ridge between two snowcapped peaks when a shadowcat came snarling from its lair, not ten yards away . The beast was gaunt and half-starved, but the sight of it sent Stonesnake ’ s mare into a panic; she reared and ran, and before the ranger could get her back under control she had stumbled on the steep slope and broken a leg.Jon had no answer for that . [BOS] If not for him, for Val . For her sister ’ s sake, the child ’ s mother . [EOS] Jon replied, and he did . [BOS] Then get out of my way, ser, [EOS] It was dark in the Skirling Pass . The great stone flanks of the mountains hid the sun for most of the day, so they rode in shadow, the breath of man and horse steaming in the cold air . Icy fingers of water trickled down from the snowpack above into small frozen pools that cracked and broke beneath the hooves of their garrons . Sometimes they would see a few weeds struggling from some crack in the rock or a splotch of pale lichen, but there was no grass, and they were above the trees now.I never knew you feared anything, Tormund.The rest was arrowheads, a torrent of arrowheads, a flood of arrowheads, arrowheads enough to drown the last few stones and shells, and all the copper pennies too.Ben Jen, the raven squawked, bobbing its head, bits of egg dribbling from its beak . Ben Jen . Ben Jen.No, truly?Cursing, Mance swung up into the saddle . Varamyr, stay and see that no harm comes to Dalla . The King-beyond-the-Wall pointed his sword at Jon . And keep a few extra eyes on this crow . If he runs, rip out his throat.As you wish, boy, Mormont said . Sam took his seat again, as did Jon . We have placed each of you in an order, as befits our need and your own strengths and skills . Bowen Marsh stepped forward and handed him a paper . The Lord Commander unrolled it and began to read . Halder, to the builders, he began . Halder gave a stiff nod of approval . Grenn, to the rangers . Albett, to the builders . Pypar, to the rangers, Pyp looked over at Jon and wiggled his ears . Samwell, to the stewards, Sam sagged with relief, mopping at his brow with a scrap of silk . Matthar, to the rangers . Dareon, to the stewards . Todder, to the rangers . Jon, to the stewards.Jon could hear the wind outside . It made a high thin sound as it shivered through the stones of the ringwall and tugged at the tent ropes . Mormont rubbed his mouth thoughtfully . Some power, he repeated . I must know.Mance Rayder ’ s outriders closed in as they emerged . Jon took their measure with a glance: eight riders, men and women both, clad in fur and boiled leather, with here and there a helm or bit of mail . They were armed with spears and fire-hardened lances, all but their leader, a fleshy blond man with watery eyes who bore a great curved scythe of sharpened steel . The Weeper, he knew at once . The black brothers told tales of this one . Like Rattleshirt and Harma Dogshead and Alfyn Crowkiller, he was a known raider.Grinning, Kegs lifted the horn to his lips, and blew the two long blasts that meant wildlings . Other horns took up the call until the Wall itself seemed to shudder, and the echo of those great deep-throated moans drowned all other sound.He put his shoulder to the one barrel with Grenn, while Kegs and Owen were wrestling with another . Together they rocked it back and forth to break the grip of the ice that had formed around its bottom . The bugger weighs a ton, said Grenn.Jon wondered . [BOS] What about water, my lord? [EOS] Yield? He blinked in disbelief . The wildlings did not make captives of the men they called the crows . They killed them, except for . . . They only spare oathbreakers . Those who join them, like Mance Rayder.Jon took off his helm as the other boys were pulling Grenn to his feet . The frosty morning air felt good on his face . He leaned on his sword, drew a deep breath, and allowed himself a moment to savor the victory.The Halfhand eased himself to the ground and sat cross-legged by the fire, the flickering light playing across the hard planes of his face . Only the two of them remained of the five rangers who had fled the Skirling Pass, back into the blue-grey wilderness of the Frostfangs.No, a mammoth! Tormund bellowed . Har!Aye . I . . . I liked it some . No one taught you such?I chain him up in the old stables when we ’ re training . They board all the horses in the east stables now, so no one bothers him . The rest of the time he stays with me . My sleeping cell is in Hardin ’ s Tower.You cheer me not . Go see the Old Bear.You would too, if you could fly.Jon was confused . [BOS] It was only a dream . [EOS] Immaculate in his fur-trimmed cloak and polished boots, Ser Alliser Thorne turned to say, Here ’ s the turncloak now, my lord . Ned Stark ’ s bastard, of Winterfell.What did you do now? Jon was amused.Pull in your claws, beastling . Tormund Giantsbane swung down off his horse . The lad ’ s here to hear . You lay a paw on him, might be I ’ ll take me that shadowskin cloak I been wanting.Ghost was gone when the wildings led their horses from the cave . Did he understand about Castle Black? Jon took a breath of the crisp morning air and allowed himself to hope . The eastern sky was pink near the horizon and pale grey higher up . The Sword of the Morning still hung in the south, the bright white star in its hilt blazing like a diamond in the dawn, but the blacks and greys of the darkling forest were turning once again to greens and golds, reds and russets . And above the soldier pines and oaks and ash and sentinels stood the Wall, the ice pale and glimmering beneath the dust and dirt that pocked its surface.Jon could feel his breakfast churning in his belly, but he pressed his lips together and made himself look at the second body . Othor had been a big ugly man, and he made a big ugly corpse . No axe was in evidence . Jon remembered Othor; he had been the one bellowing the bawdy song as the rangers rode out . His singing days were done . His flesh was blanched white as milk, everywhere but his hands . His hands were black like Jafer ’ s . Blossoms of hard cracked blood decorated the mortal wounds that covered him like a rash, breast and groin and throat . Yet his eyes were still open . They stared up at the sky, blue as sapphires.and the silence shall last long and long.You have learned the words of the vow . Think carefully before you say them, for once you have taken the black, there is no turning back . The penalty for desertion is death . The Old Bear paused for a moment before he said, Are there any among you who wish to leave our company? If so, go now, and no one shall think the less of you.You would not give up the search?Har . Tormund spat . Well, I stepped in that! He grinned at Jon . See, lad, that ’ s why he ’ s king and I ’ m not . I can outdrink, outfight, and outsing him, and my member ’ s thrice the size o ’ his, but Mance has cunning . He was raised a crow, you know, and the crow ’ s a tricksy bird.Instead Satin took a step backward and raised his visor . Jon, he said, in an anxious voice.Dawn had broken when Jon stepped from the tent beside Qhorin Halfhand . The wind swirled around them, stirring their black cloaks and sending a scatter of red cinders flying from the fire.Jon said sharply, but the force had gone out of his anger . Suddenly he felt ashamed and guilty . [BOS] Don ’ t call me that! I never … I didn ’ t think … [EOS] Jon admitted stiffly . [BOS] Lord Eddard Stark is my father, [EOS] Talk of butchery reduced Samwell Tarly to speechlessness . Mormont leaned forward . Tarly, when I was a lad half your age, my lady mother told me that if I stood about with my mouth open, a weasel was like to mistake it for his lair and run down my throat . If you have something to say, say it . Otherwise, beware of weasels . He waved a brusque dismissal . Off with you, I ’ m too busy for folly . No doubt the maester has some work you can do.Chett scowled . The maester is not accustomed to being woken in the night . Do you know how old he is?When King Robert came to Winterfell to make your father Hand, the King-beyond-the-Wall said lightly.I must be excused, he said with the last of his dignity . He whirled and bolted before they could see him cry . He must have drunk more wine than he had realized . His feet got tangled under him as he tried to leave, and he lurched sideways into a serving girl and sent a flagon of spiced wine crashing to the floor . Laughter boomed all around him, and Jon felt hot tears on his cheeks . Someone tried to steady him . He wrenched free of their grip and ran, half-blind, for the door . Ghost followed close at his heels, out into the night.I can fight, he insisted when they tried to stop him.Jon was trying to make sense of that when the horn blew.He must die, Styr the Magnar said . Do it, crow.Jon said sharply . [BOS] And how was I to do that? Take her with us, wrapped up in your cloak? We were commanded not to— [EOS] Jon Snow, you know nothing . You don ’ t go in with clothes.He shoved aside his furs and sat . The pain in his leg seemed duller, nothing he could not stand . He had slept in his breeches and tunic and smallclothes, for the added warmth, so he had only to pull on his boots and don leather and mail and cloak . The horn blew again, two long blasts, so he slung Longclaw over one shoulder, found his crutch, and hobbled down the steps.Sam blinked at the sudden glare and looked around apprehensively . The Wildlings … they wouldn ’ t … they ’ d never dare come this close to the Wall . Would they?Then you saw us all . Prince Joffrey and Prince Tommen, Princess Myrcella, my brothers Robb and Bran and Rickon, my sisters Arya and Sansa . You saw them walk the center aisle with every eye upon them and take their seats at the table just below the dais where the king and queen were seated.It ’ s an awful thing to find a brother dead . You ’ d have need of a drink as well, Lord Snow . Edd stirred the kettle and added a pinch more nutmeg.Qhorin drew his longsword . The tale of how he had taught himself to fight with his left hand after losing half of his right was part of his legend; it was said that he handled a blade better now than he ever had before . Jon stood shoulder to shoulder with the big ranger and pulled Longclaw from its sheath . Despite the chill in the air, sweat stung his eyes.They grow stronger as the days grow shorter and the nights colder . First they kill you, then they send your dead against you . The giants have not been able to stand against them, nor the Thenns, the ice river clans, the Hornfoots.These are bad times to dwell alone in the wild . The cold winds are rising.The king would speak with you, Jon Snow.Every day he spent among the wildlings made what he had to do that much harder . He was going to have to find some way to betray these men, and when he did they would die . He did not want their friendship, any more than he wanted Ygritte ’ s love . And yet . . . the Thenns spoke the Old Tongue and seldom talked to Jon at all, but it was different with Jarl ’ s raiders, the men who ’ d climbed the Wall . Jon was coming to know them despite himself: gaunt, quiet Errok and gregarious Grigg the Goat, the boys Quort and Bodger, Hempen Dan the ropemaker . The worst of the lot was Del, a horsefaced youth near Jon ’ s own age, who would talk dreamily of this wildling girl he meant to steal . She ’ s lucky, like your Ygritte . She ’ s kissed by fire.No . I was acting on orders . Qhorin Halfhand ’ s last command . Noye, where is the garrison?These are old, Mormont complained, and his raven echoed him with a sharp cry of Old, old.In stone halls they burn their great fires,Craster sat above the fire, the only man to enjoy his own chair . Even Lord Commander Mormont must seat himself on the common bench, with his raven muttering on his shoulder . Jarman Buckwell stood behind, dripping from patched mail and shiny wet leather, beside Thoren Smallwood in the late Ser Jaremy ’ s heavy breastplate and sable-trimmed cloak.Midday came and went, with still no sign of Thenns on the kingsroad . Jon heard footsteps inside the tower, though, and Owen the Oaf popped up out of the trapdoor, red-faced from the climb . He had a basket of buns under one arm, a wheel of cheese under the other, a bag of onions dangling from one hand . Hobb said to feed you, in case you ’ re stuck up here awhile.She smiled again, a flash of white teeth . And she never sung you the song o ’ the winter rose?Ghost was not like to be alone down there, he thought . Anything could be moving under that sea, creeping toward the ringfort through the dark of the wood, concealed beneath those trees . Anything . How would they ever know? He stood there for a long time, until the sun vanished behind the saw-toothed mountains and darkness began to creep through the forest.When I was no older than you, I heard a brother tell how he followed a shadowcat through these falls . He unsaddled his horse, removed her bit and bridle, and ran his fingers through her shaggy mane . There is a way through the heart of the mountain . Come dawn, if they have not found us, we will press on . The first watch is mine, brother . Qhorin seated himself on the sand, his back to a wall, no more than a vague black shadow in the gloom of the cave . Over the rush of falling waters, Jon heard a soft sound of steel on leather that could only mean that the Halfhand had drawn his sword.When he crested a rise and saw the brown rutted kingsroad before him wending its way north through hill and plain, he patted the mare ’ s neck and said, Now all we need do is follow the road, girl . Soon the Wall . His leg had gone as stiff as wood by then, and fever had made him so light-headed that twice he found himself riding in the wrong direction.When he turned back at the door, she was holding it again, trying it for balance . I almost forgot, he told her . All the best swords have names.They set out late that afternoon . The Wall had no gates as such, neither here at Castle Black nor anywhere along its three hundred miles . They led their horses down a narrow tunnel cut through the ice, cold dark walls pressing in around them as the passage twisted and turned . Three times their way was blocked by iron bars, and they had to stop while Bowen Marsh drew out his keys and unlocked the massive chains that secured them . Jon could sense the vast weight pressing down on him as he waited behind the Lord Steward . The air was colder than a tomb, and more still . He felt a strange relief when they reemerged into the afternoon light on the north side of the Wall.You make us look bad, complained Toad.He was almost ready to lower his blade and call a halt when Emmett feinted low and came in over his shield with a savage forehand slash that caught Jon on the temple . He staggered, his helm and head both ringing from the force of the blow . For half a heartbeat the world beyond his eyeslit was a blur.Nothing, for a bee . For bed I want one o ’ these . Ygritte made to grab the front of his breeches.The next time you answer me with a question, I will give you to my Lord of Bones, Mance Rayder promised Jon . He stepped closer . Who led here?I need the north.A scarred hand is nothing . On the Wall, you ’ ll be wearing gloves often as not.Do we still mount watches?When he knelt in the snow beside her, her eyes opened . Jon Snow, she said, very softly . It sounded as though the arrow had found a lung . Is this a proper castle now? Not just a tower?Jon had bitten his lip in his struggles . He could taste blood mingled with the thick, chalky potion . It was all he could do not to retch it back up.Jon drew himself up, taut as a bowstring . [BOS] And if it did trouble me, what might I do, bastard as I am? [EOS] Jon yanked away and grabbed the knight by the throat with such ferocity that he lifted him off the floor . He would have throttled him if the Eastwatch men had not pulled him off . Thorne staggered back, rubbing the marks Jon ’ s fingers had left on his neck . [BOS] You see for yourselves, brothers . The boy is a wildling . [EOS] Jon Snow, she told him, when he ’ d spent his seed inside her, don ’ t move now, sweet . I like the feel of you in there, I do . Let ’ s not go back t ’ Styr and Jarl . Let ’ s go down inside, and join up with Gendel ’ s children . I don ’ t ever want t ’ leave this cave, Jon Snow . Not ever.You will . I command it of you.He can! she insisted . You know nothing, Jon Snow . You have never seen the free folk fight!The next waking was not so gentle . The room was dark, but under the blankets the pain was back, a throbbing in his leg that turned into a hot knife at the least motion . Jon learned that the hard way when he tried to see if he still had a leg . Gasping, he swallowed a scream and made another fist.Ignore that wretched beggar bird, Jon, it ’ s just had half my bacon . The Old Bear sat at Craster ’ s board, breaking his fast with the other officers on fried bread, bacon, and sheepgut sausage . Craster ’ s new axe was on the table, its gold inlay gleaming faintly in the torchlight . Its owner was sprawled unconscious in the sleeping loft above, but the women were all up, moving about and serving . What sort of day do we have?The wildling blood is the blood of the First Men, the same blood that flows in the veins of the Starks . As to a crown, do you see one?He is looking at me, Jon thought, stunned . Winterfell is no more . Theon Greyjoy put it to the torch.A great jumble of fallen rock blocked their way partway up, where a section of the cliff face had fallen, but the surefooted little garrons were able to pick their way through . Beyond, the walls pinched in sharply, and the stream led them to the foot of a tall twisting waterfall . The air was full of mist, like the breath of some vast cold beast . The tumbling waters shone silver in the moonlight . Jon looked about in dismay . There is no way out . He and Qhorin might be able to climb the cliffs, but not with the horses . He did not think they would last long afoot.Jon turned his horse back the way they ’ d come . It was pleasant to have the rain out of his face, if only for a little while . Everyone he passed seemed to be weeping . The march was strung out through half a mile of woods . [BOS] Aye, my lord . [EOS] Jon blurted . [BOS] Let him speak, ser, [EOS] There were no true hills here, but Mance Rayder ’ s white fur tent had been raised on a spot of high stony ground right on the edge of the trees . The King-beyond-the-Wall was waiting outside, his ragged red-and-black cloak blowing in the wind . Harma Dogshead was with him, Jon saw, back from her raids and feints along the Wall, and Varamyr Sixskins as well, attended by his shadowcat and two lean grey wolves.Next had come King Robert himself, with Lady Stark on his arm . The king was a great disappointment to Jon . His father had talked of him often: the peerless Robert Baratheon, demon of the Trident, the fiercest warrior of the realm, a giant among princes . Jon saw only a fat man, red-faced under his beard, sweating through his silks . He walked like a man half in his cups.Arya was in her room, packing a polished ironwood chest that was bigger than she was . Nymeria was helping . Arya would only have to point, and the wolf would bound across the room, snatch up some wisp of silk in her jaws, and fetch it back . But when she smelled Ghost, she sat down on her haunches and yelped at them.When he caught his first glimpse of the Wall looming above the tops of an ancient gnarled oak, Jon was vastly relieved . Mormont reined up suddenly and turned in his saddle . Tarly, he barked, come here.Awkwardly, Jon took the sword in hand . His left hand; his bandaged right was still too raw and clumsy . Carefully he pulled it from its scabbard and raised it level with his eyes.Gorne, said Jon . Gorne was King-beyond-the-Wall.Ghost was trotting along beside Jon ’ s horse with tail held high, his white fur ruffed up thick against the rain . He moved so silently Jon could not have said just when he appeared . Grenn ’ s mount shied at the scent of him; even now, after more than a year, the horses were uneasy in the presence of the direwolf . Jon spurred off to Craster ’ s Keep . [BOS] With me, Ghost . [EOS] They ’ ve sent me to treat with the King-beyond-the-Wall.Jon said . He put a hand on Sam ’ s broad shoulder . [BOS] We ’ re not friends, We ’ re brothers . [EOS] The track was as steep as it was narrow, wending its way ever upward . Where the pass was so constricted that rangers had to go single file, Squire Dalbridge would take the lead, scanning the heights as he went, his longbow ever close to hand . It was said he had the keenest eyes in the Night ’ s Watch.Then cut it out . Mance turned to Rattleshirt . My Lord of Bones, keep the column moving at all costs . If we reach the Wall before Mormont, we ’ ve won.Too hot, too noisy, and I ’ d drunk too much wine, the dwarf told him . I learned long ago that it is considered rude to vomit on your brother . Might I have a closer look at your wolf?It was a long walk down to the yard.Belike we need to flush the crows, Rattleshirt bellowed over the clamor . Feather them!Then Pyp said, There ’ s blood on the floor.—that we fuck beneath your cloak many a night . I never said when we started, though . The smile she gave him was almost shy . Find another place for Ghost to sleep tonight, Jon Snow . It ’ s like Mance said . Deeds is truer than words.As they rode down in the cage, Pyp took off his helm and wiped his brow . Frozen sweat . Is there anything as disgusting as frozen sweat? He laughed . Gods, I don ’ t think I have ever been so hungry . I could eat an aurochs whole, I swear it . Do you think Hobb will cook up Grenn for us? When he saw Jon ’ s face, his smile died . What ’ s wrong? Is it your leg?Fight with them, Qhorin had said, before he surrendered his own life to Longclaw . . . but it had not come to that, till now . Once I shed a brother ’ s blood I am lost . I cross the Wall for good then, and there is no crossing back.The arrow was black, Jon saw, but it was fletched with white duck feathers . Not mine, he told himself, not one of mine . But he felt as if it were.Ghost kept pace with them for almost half a mile, red tongue lolling from his mouth . Man and horse alike lowered their heads as he asked the mare for more speed . The wolf slowed, stopped, watching, his eyes glowing red in the moonlight . He vanished behind, but Jon knew he would follow, at his own pace.Jon remembered the wish he ’ d wished in his anger, the vision of Benjen Stark dead in the snow, and he looked away quickly . The dwarf had a way of sensing things, and Jon did not want him to see the guilt in his eyes . He said he ’ d be back by my name day, he admitted . His name day had come and gone, unremarked, a fortnight past . They were looking for Ser Waymar Royce, his father is bannerman to Lord Arryn . Uncle Benjen said they might search as far as the Shadow Tower . That ’ s all the way up in the mountains.I am.Yes you are . If a bear attacked you in the woods, you ’ d be too stupid to run away.The Wall can stop an army, but not a man alone . I took a lute and a bag of silver, scaled the ice near Long Barrow, walked a few leagues south of the New Gift, and bought a horse . All in all I made much better time than Robert, who was traveling with a ponderous great wheelhouse to keep his queen in comfort . A day south of Winterfell I came up on him and fell in with his company . Freeriders and hedge knights are always attaching themselves to royal processions, in hopes of finding service with the king, and my lute gained me easy acceptance . He laughed . I know every bawdy song that ’ s ever been made, north or south of the Wall . So there you are . The night your father feasted Robert, I sat in the back of his hall on a bench with the other freeriders, listening to Orland of Oldtown play the high harp and sing of dead kings beneath the sea . I betook of your lord father ’ s meat and mead, had a look at Kingslayer and Imp . . . and made passing note of Lord Eddard ’ s children and the wolf pups that ran at their heels.How many wives does he have, truly? Grenn asked.I wish I could send them all . They hate being caged.You knew him?No one had told him the Night ’ s Watch would be like this; no one except Tyrion Lannister . The dwarf had given him the truth on the road north, but by then it had been too late . Jon wondered if his father had known what the Wall would be like . He must have, he thought; that only made it hurt the worse.Jon told him . He had seen little of the dwarf since their journey ended . As the queen ’ s own brother, Tyrion Lannister had been an honored guest of the Night ’ s Watch . The Lord Commander had given him rooms in the King ’ s Tower—so-called, though no king had visited it for a hundred years—and Lannister dined at Mormont ’ s own table and spent his days riding the Wall and his nights dicing and drinking with Ser Alliser and Bowen Marsh and the other high officers . [BOS] You won ’ t learn anything from me, [EOS] Stannis gave a curt nod . Your father was a man of honor . He was no friend to me, but I saw his worth . Your brother was a rebel and a traitor who meant to steal half my kingdom, but no man can question his courage . What of you?Forty odd, said Donal Noye . The crippled and infirm, and some green boys still in training.Jon urged her . It would be hours before Qhorin came up, and a story would help keep him awake . [BOS] Tell me, I want to hear this tale of yours . [EOS] Get him up . Rough hands dragged him to his feet . Jon did not resist . Do you have a name?It must have been warmer where you come from.Still, he prayed his father ’ s gods might spare him that bleak task . The host moved but slowly, burdened as it was by all the wildlings ’ herds and children and mean little treasures, and the snows had slowed its progress even more . Most of the column was out of the foothills now, oozing down along the west bank of the Milkwater like honey on a cold winter ’ s morning, following the course of the river into the heart of the haunted forest.He woke to the sight of his own breath misting in the cold morning air . When he moved, his bones ached . Ghost was gone, the fire burnt out . Jon reached to pull aside the cloak he ’ d hung over the rock, and found it stiff and frozen . He crept beneath it and stood up in a forest turned to crystal.Ebben drew his dagger . A steel kiss will keep her quiet.Maester Aemon gave Jon ’ s crude bandage a sniff when Clydas cut it away . We?The sound faded slowly to silence . One blast meant rangers returning, and Jon thought, I was a ranger for one day, at least . Whatever may come, they cannot take that away from me.Crow, the Magnar warned, do not take me for Mance Rayder . If you lie to me, I will have your tongue.Someone moaned to his left, and he heard Septon Cellador say, Mother have mercy, oh . Oh, oh, oh, Mother have mercy.Jon walked away as confused as he was angry . Sam ’ s heart was as big as the rest of him, but for all his reading he could be as thick as Grenn at times . It was impossible, and dishonorable besides . So why do I feel so ashamed? [BOS] I have no time for this, I have horses to groom and saddle . [EOS] That was so wrong Jon might have laughed . You ’ ve got it backward . Mance suspected me from the first . If I show up in his camp wearing a black cloak again and speaking for the Night ’ s Watch, he ’ ll know that I betrayed him.They could see the fire in the night, glimmering against the side of the mountain like a fallen star . It burned redder than the other stars, and did not twinkle, though sometimes it flared up bright and sometimes dwindled down to no more than a distant spark, dull and faint.As he stood outside the armory looking up, Jon felt almost as overwhelmed as he had that day on the kingsroad, when he ’ d seen it for the first time . The Wall was like that . Sometimes he could almost forget that it was there, the way you forgot about the sky or the earth underfoot, but there were other times when it seemed as if there was nothing else in the world . It was older than the Seven Kingdoms, and when he stood beneath it and looked up, it made Jon dizzy . He could feel the great weight of all that ice pressing down on him, as if it were about to topple, and somehow Jon knew that if it fell, the world fell with it.It ’ s cold . Satin stood with his hands tucked into his armpits under his cloak . His cheeks were bright red.I heard it too!There was the wind, and horses, and something else . Jon said . [BOS] A mammoth, That was a mammoth . [EOS] Jon poured with exaggerated care, vaguely aware that he was drawing out the act . When the cups were filled, he would have no choice but to face whatever was in that letter . Yet all too soon, they were filled . Sit, boy, Mormont commanded him . Drink.The west had gone the color of a blood bruise, but the sky above was cobalt blue, deepening to purple, and the stars were coming out . Jon sat between two merlons with only a scarecrow for company and watched the Stallion gallop up the sky . Or was it the Horned Lord? He wondered where Ghost was now . He wondered about Ygritte as well, and told himself that way lay madness.Donal Noye leaned forward, into Jon ’ s face . Now think on this, boy . None of these others have ever had a master-at-arms until Ser Alliser . Their fathers were farmers and wagonmen and poachers, smiths and miners and oars on a trading galley . What they know of fighting they learned between decks, in the alleys of Oldtown and Lannisport, in wayside brothels and taverns on the kingsroad . They may have clacked a few sticks together before they came here, but I promise you, not one in twenty was ever rich enough to own a real sword . His look was grim . So how do you like the taste of your victories now, Lord Snow?The old man smiled sadly . I thought it might be.Jon swelled with pride . [BOS] Robb is a stronger lance than I am, but I ’ m the better sword, and Hullen says I sit a horse as well as anyone in the castle . [EOS] . . . with the Old Pomegranate? No, he thinks I ’ m too small and green . Grenn ’ s here too.You cannot come with me, Jon said, cupping the wolf ’ s head in his hands and looking deep into those eyes . You have to go to Castle Black . Do you understand? Castle Black . Can you find it? The way home? Just follow the ice, east and east, into the sun, and you ’ ll find it . They will know you at Castle Black, and maybe your coming will warn them . He had thought of writing out a warning for Ghost to carry, but he had no ink, no parchment, not even a writing quill, and the risk of discovery was too great . I will meet you again at Castle Black, but you have to get there by yourself . We must each hunt alone for a time . Alone.Then you ’ ll stay and say your words with me?Yet brothers they had, and sisters . Mothers who gave them birth, fathers who gave them names . They came from a hundred quarrelsome kingdoms, and they knew times may change, but men do not . So they pledged as well that the Night ’ s Watch would take no part in the battles of the realms it guarded.No more than me, said Jon quietly.On the edge of the Wall an ornate brass Myrish eye stood on three spindly legs . Maester Aemon had once used it to peer at the stars, before his own eyes had failed him . Jon swung the tube down to have a look at the foe . Even at this distance there was no mistaking Mance Rayder ’ s huge white tent, sewn together from the pelts of snow bears . The Myrish lenses brought the wildlings close enough for him to make out faces . Of Mance himself he saw no sign this morning, but his woman Dalla was outside tending the fire, while her sister Val milked a she-goat beside the tent . Dalla looked so big it was a wonder she could move . The child must be coming very soon, Jon thought . He swiveled the eye east and searched amongst the tents and trees till he found the turtle . That will be coming very soon as well . The wildlings had skinned one of the dead mammoths during the night, and they were lashing the raw bloody hide over the turtle ’ s roof, one more layer on top of the sheepskins and pelts . The turtle had a rounded top and eight huge wheels, and under the hides was a stout wooden frame . When the wildlings had begun knocking it together, Satin thought they were building a ship . Not far wrong . The turtle was a hull turned upside down and opened fore and aft; a longhall on wheels.Tormund frowned down at Jon . Best go, if it ’ s the Mance who ’ s wanting you.When Jon had been very young, too young to understand what it meant to be a bastard, he used to dream that one day Winterfell might be his . Later, when he was older, he had been ashamed of those dreams . Winterfell would go to Robb and then his sons, or to Bran or Rickon should Robb die childless . And after them came Sansa and Arya . Even to dream otherwise seemed disloyal, as if he were betraying them in his heart, wishing for their deaths . I never wanted this, he thought as he stood before the blue-eyed king and the red woman . I loved Robb, loved all of them . . . I never wanted any harm to come to any of them, but it did . And now there ’ s only me . All he had to do was say the word, and he would be Jon Stark, and nevermore a Snow . All he had to do was pledge this king his fealty, and Winterfell was his . All he had to do . . .A lordling, Pyp observed to Jon . Southron, most like near Highgarden . Pyp had traveled the Seven Kingdoms with a mummers ’ troupe, and bragged that he could tell what you were and where you ’ d been born just from the sound of your voice.An old man sitting by a fire?Jon shoved away the eye . [BOS] Near enough . It will come today, most like . Did you fill the barrels? [EOS] We ’ re not sending you to talk with Mance Rayder, Ser Alliser said . We ’ re sending you to kill him.That ’ s all in where you ’ re standing too, Ygritte said . The Stark in Winterfell wanted Bael ’ s head, but never could take him, and the taste o ’ failure galled him . One day in his bitterness he called Bael a craven who preyed only on the weak . When word o ’ that got back, Bael vowed to teach the lord a lesson . So he scaled the Wall, skipped down the kingsroad, and walked into Winterfell one winter ’ s night with harp in hand, naming himself Sygerrik of Skagos . Sygerrik means ‘ deceiver ’ in the Old Tongue, that the First Men spoke, and the giants still speak.My uncle ’ s men, Jon thought numbly . He remembered how he ’ d pleaded to ride with them . Gods, I was such a green boy . If he had taken me, it might be me lying here …Wary but excited, Arya checked the hall . Nymeria, here . Guard . She left the wolf out there to warn of intruders and closed the door . By then Jon had pulled off the rags he ’ d wrapped it in . He held it out to her.Will he now? The smith eyed him frankly . I hope that ’ s so, boy, but once I might have said the same of Robert.After the battle with the Thenns it had taken them almost a day to clear the ice and broken beams away from the inner gate . Spotted Pate and Kegs and some of the other builders had argued heatedly that they ought just leave the debris there, another obstacle for Mance . That would have meant abandoning the defense of the tunnel, though, and Noye was having none of it . With men in the murder holes and archers and spears behind each inner grate, a few determined brothers could hold off a hundred times as many wildlings and clog the way with corpses . He did not mean to give Mance Rayder free passage through the ice . So with pick and spade and ropes, they had moved the broken steps aside and dug back down to the gate.Oh, bleed that, the little man said . He pushed himself off the ledge into empty air . Jon gasped, then watched with awe as Tyrion Lannister spun around in a tight ball, landed lightly on his hands, then vaulted backward onto his legs.Up above another fire was blooming . The old wooden steps had drunk up oil like a sponge, and Donal Noye had drenched them from the ninth landing all the way down to the seventh . Jon could only hope that most of their own people had staggered up to safety before Noye threw the torches . The black brothers at least had known the plan, but the villagers had not.Bael had brought her back?We can ’ t be certain.Dead, the raven said . Dead . Dead.In half a hundred ways . He gives his sons to the wood.I need to find the midwife, Val said.Jon lowered the torch, revealing a rounded mound of soft earth . A grave, he thought . But whose? [BOS] What have you found? [EOS] Pyp was the first to see Jon . He grinned at the sight of Ghost, put two fingers in his mouth, and whistled as only a mummer ’ s boy could whistle . The shrill sound cut through the clamor like a sword . As Jon walked toward the tables, more of the brothers took note, and fell quiet . A hush spread across the cellar, until the only sounds were Jon ’ s heels clicking on the stone floor, and the soft crackle of the logs in the hearth.And this too, said Jon . A vow.Jon said . [BOS] I have to go now, Uncle Benjen is waiting . I ’ m to go north to the Wall . We have to leave today, before the snows come . [EOS] He remembered how excited Bran had been at the prospect of the journey . It was more than he could bear, the thought of leaving him behind like this . Jon brushed away his tears, leaned over, and kissed his brother lightly on the lips.Mormont moved to the fire . The Halfhand . And past time . He had grown more restive every day they waited; much longer and he would have been fit to whelp cubs . See that there ’ s hot food for the men and fodder for the horses . I ’ ll see Qhorin at once.You are a boy of fourteen, Benjen said . Not a man, not yet . Until you have known a woman, you cannot understand what you would be giving up.No . Not enough . Never enough . Jon let his sword drop . I ’ m sorry, he muttered . Emmett, are you hurt?The high officers arrived in a body; Maester Aemon leaning on Clydas, Ser Alliser cold-eyed and grim, Lord Commander Mormont resplendent in a black wool doublet with silvered bearclaw fastenings . Behind them came the senior members of the three orders: red-faced Bowen Marsh the Lord Steward, First Builder Othell Yarwyck, and Ser Jaremy Rykker, who commanded the rangers in the absence of Benjen Stark.The trees stood beneath him, warriors armored in bark and leaf, deployed in their silent ranks awaiting the command to storm the hill . Black, they seemed . . . it was only when his torchlight brushed against them that Jon glimpsed a flash of green . Faintly, he heard the sound of water flowing over rocks . Ghost vanished in the underbrush . Jon struggled after him, listening to the call of the brook, to the leaves sighing in the wind . Branches clutched at his cloak, while overhead thick limbs twined together and shut out the stars.The Watch will make good for them . Jon had no coin of his own, or he would have offered it to her . . . though he was not sure what good a few coppers or even a silver piece would do her beyond the Wall . I ’ ll speak to Lord Mormont on the morrow.Me . Jon ’ s voice was flat . Why me?Two . Two is for wildlings . Owen was tall, towheaded, and amiable, a tireless worker and surprisingly deft when it came to working wood and fixing catapults and the like, but as he ’ d gladly tell you, his mother had dropped him on his head when he was a baby, and half his wits had leaked out through his ear.Sure you will . She had a warm smile, despite her crooked teeth . And we ’ ll be free to kill you . It ’ s dangerous being free, but most come to like the taste o ’ it . She put her gloved hand on his leg, just above the knee . You ’ ll see.The Old Bear had seemed pleased by the dagger, but he preferred a steel knife at his belt, Jon had noticed . Mormont could offer no answers as to who might have buried the cloak or what it might mean . Perhaps Qhorin will know . The Halfhand had ventured deeper into the wild than any other living man.Well, thirty of us will be warm and dry, Jon thought once he ’ d gotten a good look at the hall . Perhaps as many as fifty . The place was much too small to sleep two hundred men, so most would need to remain outside . And where to put them? The rain had turned half the compound yard to ankle-deep puddles and the rest to sucking mud . Another dismal night was in prospect.I am a maester chained and sworn . My order serves, Jon . We give counsel, not commands.Best you start thinking, Noye warned him . That, or sleep with a dagger by your bed . Now go.Jon promised him . [BOS] We will, [EOS] Well, I am not satisfied, Maester, said the jowly man . I will hear these explanations for myself . Yes I will!No sooner had he started out than a lone rider emerged from the wildling camp and came toward him . He wondered if Mance was coming out to parley in no-man ’ s-land . That might make it easier, though nothing will make it easy . But as the distance between them diminished Jon saw that the horseman was short and broad, with gold rings glinting on thick arms and a white beard spreading out across his massive chest.The next morning Jon heard Rast tell Albett and Toad how his razor had slipped while he shaved.The air smelled of paper and dust and years . Before him, tall wooden shelves rose up into dimness, crammed with leatherbound books and bins of ancient scrolls . A faint yellow glow filtered through the stacks from some hidden lamp . Jon blew out the taper he carried, preferring not to risk an open flame amidst so much old dry paper . Instead he followed the light, wending his way down the narrow aisles beneath barrel-vaulted ceilings . All in black, he was a shadow among shadows, dark of hair, long of face, grey of eye . Black moleskin gloves covered his hands; the right because it was burned, the left because a man felt half a fool wearing only one glove.It was easy to lose your way beyond the Wall . Jon did not know that he could tell honor from shame anymore, or right from wrong . Father forgive me . Yes, he said.And a longer fall, said Qhorin Halfhand . Two men, I think . There are like to be two up there, sharing the watch.whilst giants still walk in the light.We can hope . It was possible, Jon supposed . . . but more likely the wildlings had simply paused for a bit of rape and plunder in Mole ’ s Town . Or maybe Styr was waiting for nightfall, to move up under cover of darkness.Pyp smacked his lips . Think of all the soup it will make . The jape was stillborn . Even Pyp sounded tired . He looks half dead, thought Jon, but so do we all . The King-beyond-the-Wall had so many men that he could throw fresh attackers at them every time, but the same handful of black brothers had to meet every assault, and it had worn them ragged.He found Sam behind the hall, standing with Gilly at the broken rabbit hutch . She was helping him back into his cloak, but when she saw Jon she stole away . Sam gave him a look of wounded reproach . I thought you would help her.The squire bowed his head . Leave me as many arrows as you can spare, brothers . He stroked his longbow . And see my garron has an apple when you ’ re home . He ’ s earned it, poor beastie.Lord Snow . Ser Alliser Thorne had named him that, to mock his bastard birth . Many of his brothers had taken to using it as well, some with affection, others to wound . But suddenly it had a different sound to it in Jon ’ s ears . It sounded . . . real . Yes, he said, hesitantly, kings have legitimized bastards before, but . . . I am still a brother of the Night ’ s Watch . I knelt before a heart tree and swore to hold no lands and father no children.Under black wool, boiled leather, and mail, sweat trickled icily down Jon ’ s chest as he pressed the attack . Grenn stumbled backward, defending himself clumsily . When he raised his sword, Jon went underneath it with a sweeping blow that crunched against the back of the other boy ’ s leg and sent him staggering . Grenn ’ s downcut was answered by an overhand that dented his helm . When he tried a sideswing, Jon swept aside his blade and slammed a mailed forearm into his chest . Grenn lost his footing and sat down hard in the snow . Jon knocked his sword from his fingers with a slash to his wrist that brought a cry of pain.I would be pleased to eat, Your Grace . And thank you.Maester Aemon was gentler . Is your friend a hunter?When he was gone, Grenn frowned . Nobody likes cravens, he said uncomfortably . I wish we hadn ’ t helped him . What if they think we ’ re craven too?Jon plucked a scroll from a bin, blew off the worst of the dust . A corner flaked off between his fingers as he unrolled it . [BOS] Mormont wanted those maps a little sooner than that . Look, this one is crumbling, [EOS] he said, frowning over the faded script.Why? Sam asked.An inventory, Sam said, or perhaps a bill of sale.A direwolf, Jon said . His name is Ghost . He stared up at the little man, his disappointment suddenly forgotten . What are you doing up there? Why aren ’ t you at the feast?That ’ s a long cruel climb by night, Ebben said as he eyed the distant spark through a cleft in the rocks that sheltered them . The sky was cloudless, the jagged mountains rising black on black until the very top, where their cold crowns of snow and ice shone palely in the moonlight.Then why did you command it of me?Yes and no . First they offered it, quietly, to Aemon . And quietly he refused . The gods meant for him to serve, not to rule, he told them . He had sworn a vow and would not break it, though the High Septon himself offered to absolve him . Well, no sane man wanted any blood of Aerion ’ s on the throne, and Daeron ’ s girl was a lackwit besides being female, so they had no choice but to turn to Aemon ’ s younger brother—Aegon, the Fifth of His Name . Aegon the Unlikely, they called him, born the fourth son of a fourth son . Aemon knew, and rightly, that if he remained at court those who disliked his brother ’ s rule would seek to use him, so he came to the Wall . And here he has remained, while his brother and his brother ’ s son and his son each reigned and died in turn, until Jaime Lannister put an end to the line of the Dragonkings.The rain might have stopped, but the compound was still a morass of shallow lakes and slippery mud . Black brothers were folding their tents, feeding their horses, and chewing on strips of salt beef . Jarman Buckwell ’ s scouts were tightening the girths on their saddles before setting out . Jon, Buckwell greeted him from horseback . Keep a good edge on that bastard sword of yours . We ’ ll be needing it soon enough.He found Ghost lapping from the stream . Ghost, he called, to me . Now . When the direwolf raised his head, his eyes glowed red and baleful, and water streamed down from his jaws like slaver . There was something fierce and terrible about him in that instant . And then he was off, bounding past Jon, racing through the trees . Ghost, no, stay, he shouted, but the wolf paid no heed . The lean white shape was swallowed by the dark, and Jon had only two choices—to climb the hill again, alone, or to follow.—he would have made it his purpose to learn why, Lord Mormont finished for him, and it may well be someone or something did not want that known . Well, we ’ ll be three hundred when Qhorin joins us . Whatever enemy waits out here will not find us so easy to deal with . We will find them, Jon, I promise you.Mormont would have none of it . I sent out Ben Stark, and Ser Waymar before him . I do not mean to send you after them and sit wondering how long I must wait before I give you up for lost as well . He pointed . And Stark remains First Ranger until we know for a certainty that he is dead . Should that day come, it will be me who names his successor, not you . Now stop wasting my time . We ride at first light, or have you forgotten?We ride at noon, the ranger told him . Best find that wolf of yours.Aye, Dywen says . And the last time he went ranging, he says he saw a bear fifteen feet tall . Mormont snorted . My sister is said to have taken a bear for her lover . I ’ d believe that before I ’ d believe one fifteen feet tall . Though in a world where dead come walking . . . ah, even so, a man must believe his eyes . I have seen the dead walk . I ’ ve not seen any giant bears . He gave Jon a long, searching look . But we were speaking of hands . How is yours?Jon had no answer for that . Small wonder that the Seven Kingdoms thought the free folk scarcely human . They have no laws, no honor, not even simple decency . They steal endlessly from each other, breed like beasts, prefer rape to marriage, and fill the world with baseborn children . Yet he was growing fond of Tormund Giantsbane, great bag of wind and lies though he was . Longspear as well . And Ygritte . . . no, I will not think about Ygritte.Up, Rattleshirt told Jon . Mance is up top.Half fish, half goat, half horse . . . there ’ s too many halves to you, Ygritte . He shook his head . We wouldn ’ t need to swim, if this is the place I think . We could walk.Jon protested . [BOS] I am almost a man grown, I will turn fifteen on my next name day, and Maester Luwin says bastards grow up faster than other children . [EOS] To me, Ghost . Jon knelt . Bring it here.Tormund spoke truly, said Mance Rayder as he ripped apart a loaf of bread . The black crow is a tricksy bird, that ’ s so . . . but I was a crow when you were no bigger than the babe in Dalla ’ s belly, Jon Snow . So take care not to play tricksy with me.Winterfell, he said, by way of Castle Black.The squire shrugged . Nor me, but you won ’ t stop it . Only waste a good arrow.Everyone laughed but Grenn . I hope I ’ m a ranger.For a wench, some say . For a crown, others would have it . Qhorin tested the edge of his sword with the ball of his thumb . He liked women, Mance did, and he was not a man whose knees bent easily, that ’ s true . But it was more than that . He loved the wild better than the Wall . It was in his blood . He was wildling born, taken as a child when some raiders were put to the sword . When he left the Shadow Tower he was only going home again.Jon ’ s finger traced the outline of the direwolf in the white wax of the broken seal . He recognized Robb ’ s hand, but the letters seemed to blur and run as he tried to read them . He realized he was crying . And then, through the tears, he found the sense in the words, and raised his head . He woke up, he said . The gods gave him back.Ghost backed away from him uncertainly.Jon sat, and took a sip of wine.Different roads sometimes lead to the same castle . Who knows? He was feeling better now . He was not going to let himself be sad . I better go . I ’ ll spend my first year on the Wall emptying chamber pots if I keep Uncle Ben waiting any longer.Kill him, urged Harma . Send his body back up in that cage o ’ theirs and tell them to send us someone else . I ’ ll keep his head for my standard . A turncloak ’ s worse than a dog.Mance ran a hand along the curve of the great horn . No man goes hunting with only one arrow in his quiver, he said . I had hoped that Styr and Jarl would take your brothers unawares, and open the gate for us . I drew your garrison away with feints and raids and secondary attacks . Bowen Marsh swallowed that lure as I knew he would, but your band of cripples and orphans proved to be more stubborn than anticipated . Don ’ t think you ’ ve stopped us, though . The truth is, you are too few and we are too many . I could continue the attack here and still send ten thousand men to cross the Bay of Seals on rafts and take Eastwatch from the rear . I could storm the Shadow Tower too, I know the approaches as well as any man alive . I could send men and mammoths to dig out the gates at the castles you ’ ve abandoned, all of them at once.Lord Snow is nothing if not arrogant, said Ser Alliser . He murdered Qhorin just as his fellow turncloaks did Lord Mormont . It would not surprise me to learn that it was all part of the same fell plot . Benjen Stark may well have a hand in all this as well . For all we know, he is sitting in Mance Rayder ’ s tent even now . You know these Starks, my lord.Jon climbed into his saddle . When Bowen Marsh and their ranger escort had mounted, Jon put two fingers in his mouth and whistled . Ghost came loping out of the tunnel . [BOS] They never have . [EOS] It made no sense at first, but as Jon turned it over in his mind, dawn broke . When you were a brother of the Watch . . .I will . They broke apart and looked at each other awkwardly . Uncle Benjen said to send you to the stables if I saw you, Robb finally said.Lord Commander Mormont sighed deep in his chest . I see no other choice, he conceded, but if you do not return . . .He rode till dawn, while the stars stared down like eyes.If I lurk about after, not too close to the fire, belike they ’ ll take no note of me till morn . The ones under his roof will be the first he murders, but at least we ’ ll die dry.If you ’ re lying to me again, you won ’ t be leaving here alive, Mance warned . His guards brought him his horse and armor . Elsewhere around the camp, Jon saw people running at cross purposes, some men forming up as if to storm the Wall while others slipped into the woods, women driving dog carts east, mammoths wandering west . He reached back over his shoulder and drew Longclaw just as a thin line of rangers emerged from the fringes of the wood three hundred yards away . They wore black mail, black halfhelms, and black cloaks . Half-armored, Mance drew his sword . You knew nothing of this, did you? he said to Jon, coldly.Is it morning? Down here there ’ s no way to know.Jon asked . [BOS] Why are you weeping? It was only a song . There are hundreds of giants, I ’ ve just seen them . [EOS] He was awake when Owen came to him, lying restless under a pile of furs on the floor of the warming shed . Lord Snow, said Owen, shaking his shoulder, the dawn . He gave Jon a hand to help pull him back onto his feet . Others were waking as well, jostling one another as they pulled on their boots and buckled their swordbelts in the close confines of the shed . No one spoke . They were all too tired for talk . Few of them ever left the Wall these days . It took too long to ride up and down in the cage . Castle Black had been abandoned to Maester Aemon, Ser Wynton Stout, and a few others too old or ill to fight.The mare was blown, but Jon could not let up on her . He had to reach the Wall before the Magnar . He would have slept in the saddle if he ’ d had one; lacking that, it was hard enough to stay ahorse while awake . His wounded leg grew ever more painful . He dare not rest long enough to let it heal . Instead he ripped it open anew each time he mounted up.They were fools to leave such a castle, said Ygritte.Good . On the table between them, Lord Mormont laid a large sword in a black metal scabbard banded with silver . Here . You ’ ll be ready for this, then.Jon said, [BOS] My lord father believed no man could tell a lie in front of a heart tree . The old gods know when men are lying . [EOS] A half brother, he admitted . I ’ m Ned Stark ’ s bastard . My brother Robb is the King in the North . Why are you here?They had pulled him out this morning, after four days in the ice, locked up in a cell five by five by five, too low for him to stand, too tight for him to stretch out on his back . The stewards had long ago discovered that food and meat kept longer in the icy storerooms carved from the base of the Wall . . . but prisoners did not . You will die in here, Lord Snow, Ser Alliser had said just before he closed the heavy wooden door, and Jon had believed it . But this morning they had come and pulled him out again, and marched him cramped and shivering back to the King ’ s Tower, to stand before jowly Janos Slynt once moreHow many crows remain within the castles? asked Styr.Tyrion Lannister was sitting on the ledge above the door to the Great Hall, looking for all the world like a gargoyle . The dwarf grinned down at him . Is that animal a wolf?We may . If any of us still live . That ’ s for the Old Bear to say, the one you call the Lord Crow . I ’ m only his squire . I do not choose the road I ride.You . You must lead.Dareon broke off and lifted his visor . Seven gods, he murmured . Would you look at this, Jon.Eighty years or close enough, the Old Bear said, and no, I still hadn ’ t been born, though Aemon had forged half a dozen links of his maester ’ s chain by then . Aerys wed his own sister, as the Targaryens were wont to do, and reigned for ten or twelve years . Aemon took his vows and left the Citadel to serve at some lordling ’ s court . . . until his royal uncle died without issue . The Iron Throne passed to the last of King Daeron ’ s four sons . That was Maekar, Aemon ’ s father . The new king summoned all his sons to court and would have made Aemon part of his councils, but he refused, saying that would usurp the place rightly belonging to the Grand Maester . Instead he served at the keep of his eldest brother, another Daeron . Well, that one died too, leaving only a feeble-witted daughter as heir . Some pox he caught from a whore, I believe . The next brother was Aerion.Samwell Tarly huddled beneath the trees, half-hidden behind the horses . His round fat face was the color of curdled milk . So far he had not lurched off to the woods to retch, but he had not so much as glanced at the dead men either . I can ’ t look, he whispered miserably.What? That we ’ d take her with us?That afternoon, the watch commander sent him to the winch cage with four barrels of fresh-crushed stone, to scatter gravel over the icy footpaths atop the Wall . It was lonely and boring work, even with Ghost along for company, but Jon found he did not mind . On a clear day you could see half the world from the top of the Wall, and the air was always cold and bracing . He could think here, and he found himself thinking of Samwell Tarly … and, oddly, of Tyrion Lannister . He wondered what Tyrion would have made of the fat boy . Most men would rather deny a hard truth than face it, the dwarf had told him, grinning . The world was full of cravens who pretended to be heroes; it took a queer sort of courage to admit to cowardice as Samwell Tarly had.Jon swallowed a groan . Feints . Mance wants us to spread ourselves thin, don ’ t you see? And Bowen Marsh has obliged him . The gate is here . The attack is here.The cold winds are rising . Mormont feared as much . Benjen Stark felt it as well . Dead men walk and the trees have eyes again . Why should we balk at wargs and giants?Jon asked her . [BOS] Were you sent to watch for us? [EOS] Jon kept his face as still as ice . Foul enough to slay a man in his own tent under truce . Must I murder him in front of his wife as their child is being born? He closed the fingers of his sword hand . Mance was not wearing armor, but his own sword was sheathed on his left hip . And there were other weapons in the tent, daggers and dirks, a bow and a quiver of arrows, a bronze-headed spear lying beside that big black . . .Who is Ygritte? Donal Noye asked pointedly.Pyp followed him . Jon, what is it?Is he making a city, or an army?The weariness came on him suddenly, as he donned the roughspun blacks that were their everyday wear . He sat on a bench, his fingers fumbling with the fastenings on his cloak . So cold, he thought, remembering the warm halls of Winterfell, where the hot waters ran through the walls like blood through a man ’ s body . There was scant warmth to be found in Castle Black; the walls were cold here, and the people colder.You and everyone else, said Matthar . Every man who wore the black walked the Wall, and every man was expected to take up steel in its defense, but the rangers were the true fighting heart of the Night ’ s Watch . It was they who dared ride beyond the Wall, sweeping through the haunted forest and the icy mountain heights west of the Shadow Tower, fighting Wildlings and giants and monstrous snow bears.Soon the Wall . He pictured his friends drinking mulled wine in the common hall . Hobb would be with his kettles, Donal Noye at his forge, Maester Aemon in his rooms beneath the rookery . And the Old Bear? Sam, Grenn, Dolorous Edd, Dywen with his wooden teeth . . . Jon could only pray that some had escaped the Fist.No doubt . You ’ d best get a bird ready . Mormont will want to send back word.In the very shadow of the Wall the wildlings made ready, winding thick coils of hempen rope around one shoulder and down across their chests, and lacing on queer boots of supple doeskin . The boots had spikes jutting from the toes; iron, for Jarl and two others, bronze for some, but most often jagged bone . Small stone-headed hammers hung from one hip, a leathern bag of stakes from the other . Their ice axes were antlers with sharpened tines, bound to wooden hafts with strips of hide . The eleven climbers sorted themselves into three teams of four; Jarl himself made the twelfth man . Mance promises swords for every man of the first team to reach the top, he told them, his breath misting in the cold air . Southron swords of castle-forged steel . And your name in the song he ’ ll make of this, that too . What more could a free man ask? Up, and the Others take the hindmost!You ought to burn them you killed, said Ygritte.My rangers— started Thoren Smallwood.Don ’ t call me Lord Snow.Was it you killed her?Jon tried to shout, but his voice was gone . Staggering to his feet, he kicked the arm away and snatched the lamp from the Old Bear ’ s fingers . The flame flickered and almost died . Burn! the raven cawed . Burn, burn, burn!His half sisters escorted the royal princes . Arya was paired with plump young Tommen, whose white-blond hair was longer than hers . Sansa, two years older, drew the crown prince, Joffrey Baratheon . He was twelve, younger than Jon or Robb, but taller than either, to Jon ’ s vast dismay . Prince Joffrey had his sister ’ s hair and his mother ’ s deep green eyes . A thick tangle of blond curls dripped down past his golden choker and high velvet collar . Sansa looked radiant as she walked beside him, but Jon did not like Joffrey ’ s pouty lips or the bored, disdainful way he looked at Winterfell ’ s Great Hall.Jon bowed his head stiffly, and went . If all the wildlings were like Styr, it would be easier to betray them . The Thenns were not like other free folk, though . The Magnar claimed to be the last of the First Men, and ruled with an iron hand . His little land of Thenn was a high mountain valley hidden amongst the northernmost peaks of the Frostfangs, surrounded by cave dwellers, Hornfoot men, giants, and the cannibal clans of the ice rivers . Ygritte said the Thenns were savage fighters, and that their Magnar was a god to them . Jon could believe that . Unlike Jarl and Harma and Rattleshirt, Styr commanded absolute obedience from his men, and that discipline was no doubt part of why Mance had chosen him to go over the Wall.Hear my words, and bear witness to my vow, they recited, their voices filling the twilit grove . Night gathers, and now my watch begins . It shall not end until my death . I shall take no wife, hold no lands, father no children . I shall wear no crowns and win no glory . I shall live and die at my post . I am the sword in the darkness . I am the watcher on the walls . I am the fire that burns against the cold, the light that brings the dawn, the horn that wakes the sleepers, the shield that guards the realms of men . I pledge my life and honor to the Night ’ s Watch, for this night and all the nights to come.The wind was blowing snow into Jon ’ s eyes . He could feel the blood freezing on his face . Are we talking or riding?I yield . Her words steamed in the cold air.I ’ ve been bruised before . He touched his shoulder and winced . The yard was emptying around them.Aye, and slew his brother, said a short homely man in a rust-eaten iron halfhelm.The last night fell black and moonless, but for once the sky was clear . I am going up the hill to look for Ghost, he told the Thenns at the cave mouth, and they grunted and let him pass.With the confusion at the trapdoor, Jon had forgotten to fill his quiver . He limped back across the roof and did that now, and picked up his bow as well . The kettle had not moved from where he ’ d left it, so it seemed as though they were safe enough for the nonce . The dance has moved on, and we ’ re watching from the gallery, he thought as he hobbled back . Satin was loosing quarrels at the wildlings on the steps, then ducking down behind a merlon to cock the crossbow . He may be pretty, but he ’ s quick.Dawn and Qhorin Halfhand arrived together . The black stones had turned to grey and the eastern sky had gone indigo when Stonesnake spied the rangers below, wending their way upward . Jon woke his captive and held her by the arm as they descended to meet them . Thankfully, there was another way off the mountain to the north and west, along paths much gentler than the one that had brought them up here . They were waiting in a narrow defile when their brothers appeared, leading their garrons . Ghost raced ahead at first scent of them . Jon squatted to let the direwolf close his jaws around his wrist, tugging his hand back and forth . It was a game they played . But when he glanced up, he saw Ygritte watching with eyes as wide and white as hen ’ s eggs.The other houses had yielded no wisdom . Gone, cried Mormont ’ s raven, flapping up into the weirwood to perch above them . Gone, gone, gone.Ghost slid past him, out the door . The wolf started up the steps, stopped, looked back at Jon . That was when he heard it; the soft scrape of a boot on stone, the sound of a latch turning . The sounds came from above . From the Lord Commander ’ s chambers.There were tears on Ygritte ’ s cheeks when the song ended.Something rubbed against his leg beneath the table . Jon saw red eyes staring up at him . Hungry again? he asked . There was still half a honeyed chicken in the center of the table . Jon reached out to tear off a leg, then had a better idea . He knifed the bird whole and let the carcass slide to the floor between his legs . Ghost ripped into it in savage silence . His brothers and sisters had not been permitted to bring their wolves to the banquet, but there were more curs than Jon could count at this end of the hall, and no one had said a word about his pup . He told himself he was fortunate in that too.Wetly . The fat boy managed a smile . Nothing has killed me yet, though.Arya knew what was coming next . They said it together.Donal Noye turned toward the two great trebuchets that Bowen Marsh had restored to working order . Give me light! he roared.If you like . Their voices blended as one beneath the rising moon, while Ghost listened and the mountains themselves bore witness . Night gathers, and now my watch begins . It shall not end until my death . I shall take no wife, hold no lands, father no children . I shall wear no crowns and win no glory . I shall live and die at my post . I am the sword in the darkness . I am the watcher on the walls . I am the fire that burns against the cold, the light that brings the dawn, the horn that wakes the sleepers, the shield that guards the realms of men . I pledge my life and honor to the Night ’ s Watch, for this night and all the nights to come.Ghost . I had to leave him when I climbed the Wall . I ’ d hoped he ’ d make his way back here.Good, King Stannis said, for the surest way to seal a new alliance is with a marriage . I mean to wed my Lord of Winterfell to this wildling princess.Jon said . [BOS] Not if she doesn ’ t know you have it, [EOS] By that afternoon the trees had begun to thin, and they marched east over gently rolling plains . Grass rose waist high around them, and stands of wild wheat swayed gently when the wind came gusting, but for the most part the day was warm and bright . Toward sunset, however, clouds began to threaten in the west . They soon engulfed the orange sun, and Lenn foretold a bad storm coming . His mother was a woods witch, so all the raiders agreed he had a gift for foretelling the weather . There ’ s a village close, Grigg the Goat told the Magnar . Two miles, three . We could shelter there . Styr agreed at once.He heard Grenn whispering behind him . There ’ s no godswood here . Is there? I never saw a godswood.After . The word was a spear thrust . After the war . After the conquest . After the wildlings break the Wall . . .And ride the rest of the day with wet clothes frozen to our skins? he objected.Stonesnake had passed the rope around the smooth spike of rock he was waiting on, but as soon as Jon reached him he shook it loose and was off again . This time there was no convenient cleft when he reached the end of their tether, so he took out his felt-headed hammer and drove a spike deep into a crack in the stone with a series of gentle taps . Soft as the sounds were, they echoed off the stone so loudly that Jon winced with every blow, certain that the wildlings must hear them too . When the spike was secure, Stonesnake secured the rope to it, and Jon started after him . Suck on the mountain ’ s teat, he reminded himself . Don ’ t look down . Keep your weight above your feet . Don ’ t look down . Look at the rock in front of you . There ’ s a good handhold, yes . Don ’ t look down . I can catch a breath on that ledge there, all I need to do is reach it . Never look down.Aye, said Tormund, striding off.Oh, I learn things everywhere I go . The little man gestured up at the Wall with a gnarled black walking stick . As I was saying … why is it that when one man builds a wall, the next man immediately needs to know what ’ s on the other side? He cocked his head and looked at Jon with his curious mismatched eyes . You do want to know what ’ s on the other side, don ’ t you?He ’ s of my village . You know nothing, Jon Snow . A true man steals a woman from afar, t ’ strengthen the clan . Women who bed brothers or fathers or clan kin offend the gods, and are cursed with weak and sickly children . Even monsters.He is not my father . The thought leapt unbidden to Jon ’ s mind . Lord Eddard Stark is my father . I will not forget him, no matter how many swords they give me . Yet he could scarcely tell Lord Mormont that it was another man ’ s sword he dreamt of …The scabbard was soft grey leather, supple as sin . Jon drew out the blade slowly, so she could see the deep blue sheen of the steel . This is no toy, he told her . Be careful you don ’ t cut yourself . The edges are sharp enough to shave with.Ser Endrew? Jon did not know the name.Some power . What it is, our captive could not say . He was questioned perhaps too sharply, and died with much unsaid . I doubt he knew in any case.The old man said no word . He only looked at Jon, standing amongst the wildlings . Amidst the rain and smoke, lit only by the fire, he could not have seen that Jon was all in black, but for his sheepskin cloak . Or could he?Jon caught her wrist . What if the man who stole you drank too much? he insisted . What if he was brutal or cruel? He tightened his grip to make a point . What if he was stronger than you, and liked to beat you bloody?I thought . . . maybe by then I could think of a way . . .Die! the raven cried.The Old Bear ’ s not like to give you a choice.Maybe you could write an account of our ranging, Sam.The Magnar sent a dozen men riding west and a dozen more east, to climb the highest hills they could find and watch for any sign of rangers in the wood or riders on the high ice . The Thenns carried bronze-banded warhorns to give warning should the Watch be sighted . The other wildlings fell in behind Jarl, Jon and Ygritte with the rest . This was to be the young raider ’ s hour of glory.When he awoke the sky was black outside the arrow slit that served him for a window, and four men he did not know were standing over him . One held a lantern . Jon Snow, the tallest of them said brusquely, pull on your boots and come with us.The other two teams had no happily placed trees to give them a leg up, and before long the Thenns were wondering whether they had gotten lost climbing the ridge . Jarl ’ s party were all on the Wall and eighty feet up before the leading climbers from the other groups came into view . The teams were spaced a good twenty yards apart . Jarl ’ s four were in the center . To the right of them was a team headed up by Grigg the Goat, whose long blond braid made him easy to spot from below . To the left a very thin man named Errok led the climbers.The gods play cruel jests, Jon thought . Pyp and Toad, all a lather to be a part of the great ranging, were to remain at Castle Black . It was Samwell Tarly, the self-proclaimed coward, grossly fat, timid, and near as bad a rider as he was with a sword, who must face the haunted forest . The Old Bear was taking two cages of ravens, so they might send back word as they went . Maester Aemon was blind and far too frail to ride with them, so his steward must go in his place . We need you for the ravens, Sam . And someone has to help me keep Grenn humble.The maester is abed, as you should be . Come back on the morrow and maybe he ’ ll see you . He began to shut the door.Out under the trees, some rangers had found enough duff and dry wood to start a fire beneath a slanting ridge of slate . Others had raised tents or made rude shelters by stretching their cloaks over low branches . Giant had crammed himself inside the hollow of a dead oak . How d ’ ye like my castle, Lord Snow?. . . of Bael the Bard and the rose of Winterfell . So Stonesnake told me . It happens I know the song . Mance would sing it of old, when he came back from a ranging . He had a passion for wildling music . Aye, and for their women as well.Some of the ravens were still eating, long stringy bits of meat dangling from their beaks . The rest seemed to be watching him . Jon could feel the weight of all those tiny black eyes . And this is my day … is that what you ’ re saying?Jon held his breath, and heard it . Far away and behind them, the call of a hunting horn echoed against the mountains.Abandoned . . .? Jon almost choked on the word.A blacksmith . He only had one arm.Outrider ’ s horn, Tormund told Mance.Something ’ s coming . Varamyr sat crosslegged on the half-frozen ground, his wolves circled restlessly around him . A shadow swept over him, and Jon looked up to see the eagle ’ s blue-grey wings . Coming, from the east.You ’ re our captive, then . He pulled the dirk away from the soft skin of her throat.Slynt slammed a fist on the table . I heard you! Ser Alliser had your measure true enough, it seems . You lie through your bastard ’ s teeth . Well, I will not suffer it . I will not! You might have fooled this crippled blacksmith, but not Janos Slynt! Oh, no . Janos Slynt does not swallow lies so easily . Did you think my skull was stuffed with cabbage?Jon said, as much to himself as to the others . Their only hope was to try and crush the turtle when it reached the Wall . For that, they needed boulders . No matter how stoutly built the turtle was, a huge chunk of rock crashing straight down on top of it from seven hundred feet was bound to do some damage . [BOS] The hides won ’ t burn, Grenn, Owen, Kegs, it ’ s time . [EOS] The black arrows hissed downward, like snakes on feathered wings . Jon did not wait to see where they struck . He reached for a second arrow as soon as the first left his bow . NOTCH . DRAW . LOOSE . As soon as the arrow flew he found another . NOTCH . DRAW . LOOSE . Again, and then again . Jon shouted for the trebuchet, and heard the creak and heavy thud as a hundred spiked steel caltrops went spinning through the air . Catapults, he called, scorpions . Bowmen, loose at will . Wildling arrows were striking the Wall now, a hundred feet below them . A second giant spun and staggered . Notch, draw, loose . A mammoth veered into another beside it, spilling giants on the ground . Notch, draw, loose . The ram was down and done, he saw, the giants who ’ d pushed it dead or dying . Fire arrows, he shouted . I want that ram burning . The screams of wounded mammoths and the booming cries of giants mingled with the drums and pipes to make an awful music, yet still his archers drew and loosed, as if they ’ d all gone as deaf as dead Dick Follard . They might be the dregs of the order, but they were men of the Night ’ s Watch, or near enough as made no matter . That ’ s why they shall not pass.You did not, Grenn said, scowling . I would have seen.Don ’ t cozen me, Snow, you know I won ’ t have it . Let me have a look at these maps . Mormont pawed through them brusquely, giving each no more than a glance and a grunt . Was this all you could find?Your roof, your rule, said Thoren Smallwood, and Lord Mormont nodded stiffly, though he looked none too pleased.All you have to give, Jon Snow . He is a king.Aye, I ’ ll do that . The skinchanger was a head shorter than Jon, slumped and soft, but that shadowcat could disembowel him with one paw . They ’ re coming from the north too, Varamyr told Mance . You best go.Lady Stark was there beside his bed . She had been there, day and night, for close on a fortnight . Not for a moment had she left Bran ’ s side . She had her meals brought to her there, and chamber pots as well, and a small hard bed to sleep on, though it was said she had scarcely slept at all . She fed him herself, the honey and water and herb mixture that sustained life . Not once did she leave the room . So Jon had stayed away.Jon went back inside to where the others waited . [BOS] We need to repair the outer gate as best we can and then block up this section of the tunnel . Rubble, chunks of ice, anything . All the way to the second gate, if we can . Ser Wynton will need to take command, he ’ s the last knight left, but he needs to move now, the giants will be back before we know it . We have to tell him— [EOS] That morning he called it first . I ’ m Lord of Winterfell! he cried, as he had a hundred times before . Only this time, this time, Robb had answered, You can ’ t be Lord of Winterfell, you ’ re bastard-born . My lady mother says you can ’ t ever be the Lord of Winterfell.The long low note lingered at the edge of hearing . The sentries at the ringwall stood still in their footsteps, breath frosting and heads turned toward the west . As the sound of the horn faded, even the wind ceased to blow . Men rolled from their blankets and reached for spears and swordbelts, moving quietly, listening . A horse whickered and was hushed . For a heartbeat it seemed as if the whole forest were holding its breath . The brothers of the Night ’ s Watch waited for a second blast, praying they should not hear it, fearing that they would.The ground was littered with pine needles and blown leaves, a carpet of green and brown still damp from the recent rains . It squished beneath their feet . Huge bare oaks, tall sentinels, and hosts of soldier pines stood all around them . On a hill above them was another roundtower, ancient and empty, thick green moss crawling up its side almost to the summit . Who built that, all of stone like that? Ygritte asked him . Some king?This was Brandon the Daughterless, Ygritte said sharply . Would you hear the tale, or no?And then the years were gone, and he was back at Winterfell once more, wearing a quilted leather coat in place of mail and plate . His sword was made of wood, and it was Robb who stood facing him, not Iron Emmett.Are bastards weaker than other children? More sickly, more like to fail?The hunters approached warily, perhaps fearing arrows . Jon counted fourteen, with eight dogs . Their large round shields were made of skins stretched over woven wicker and painted with skulls . About half of them hid their faces behind crude helms of wood and boiled leather . On either wing, archers notched shafts to the strings of small wood-and-horn bows, but did not loose . The rest seemed to be armed with spears and mauls . One had a chipped stone axe . They wore only what bits of armor they had looted from dead rangers or stolen during raids . Wildlings did not mine or smelt, and there were few smiths and fewer forges north of the Wall.Uncle Benjen studied his face carefully . The Wall is a hard place for a boy, Jon.He mounted, the reins in his hand, and wheeled the horse around to face the night . Samwell Tarly stood in the stable door, a full moon peering over his shoulder . He threw a giant ’ s shadow, immense and black . Get out of my way, Sam.Curiously, Marsh glanced at Jon before he answered . Maester Aemon has the letter . He ’ s waiting in your solar.From that day forth, neither Rast nor any of the others would hurt Samwell Tarly . When Ser Alliser matched them against him, they would stand their ground and swat aside his slow, clumsy strokes . If the master-at-arms screamed for an attack, they would dance in and tap Sam lightly on breastplate or helm or leg . Ser Alliser raged and threatened and called them all cravens and women and worse, yet Sam remained unhurt . A few nights later, at Jon ’ s urging, he joined them for the evening meal, taking a place on the bench beside Halder . It was another fortnight before he found the nerve to join their talk, but in time he was laughing at Pyp ’ s faces and teasing Grenn with the best of them.This boy? The earless man was angered by the news . The Halfhand should have been mine . Do you have a name, crow?Mormont himself confirmed Grenn ’ s doubts . Castle Black has no need of a godswood . Beyond the Wall the haunted forest stands as it stood in the Dawn Age, long before the Andals brought the Seven across the narrow sea . You will find a grove of weirwoods half a league from this spot, and mayhap your gods as well.Ghost should be back by dawn . He hunts at night.Finally, after three girls in as many years, Lady Tarly gave her lord husband a second son . From that day, Lord Randyll ignored Sam, devoting all his time to the younger boy, a fierce, robust child more to his liking . Samwell had known several years of sweet peace with his music and his books.His lord father had come first, escorting the queen . She was as beautiful as men said . A jeweled tiara gleamed amidst her long golden hair, its emeralds a perfect match for the green of her eyes . His father helped her up the steps to the dais and led her to her seat, but the queen never so much as looked at him . Even at fourteen, Jon could see through her smile.Jon gave his garron the last of the oats and stroked his shaggy mane while Ghost prowled restlessly amongst the rocks . He pulled his gloves on tighter and flexed his burnt fingers . I am the shield that guards the realms of men.Good . Craster ’ s Keep is just ahead . If the gods are good, he ’ ll let us sleep by his fire.The cold gods, she said . The ones in the night . The white shadows.Some have searched for it . Them that go too deep find Gendel ’ s children, and Gendel ’ s children are always hungry . Smiling, she set the torch carefully in a notch of rock, and came toward him . There ’ s naught to eat in the dark but flesh, she whispered, biting at his neck.Ghost, Jon breathed, surprised . So you came inside after all, eh? The white wolf often hunted all night; he had not expected to see him again till daybreak . Was the hunting so bad? he asked . Here . To me, Ghost.Is it Mance Rayder? Satin asked anxiously.Mance gave her a fond smile . It ’ s a wise woman I ’ ve found . A true queen . He turned back to Jon . Go back and tell them to open their gate and let us pass . If they do, I will give them the horn, and the Wall will stand until the end of days.Finally the cage came clanking back down, swaying at the end of the long chain, and they crowded in silently and shut the door.As well, the Lord Commander continued, ignoring the bird ’ s protest, it puts a thousand leagues twixt him and you without it seeming a rebuke . He jabbed a finger up at Jon ’ s face . And don ’ t think this means I approve of that nonsense in the common hall . Valor makes up for a fair amount of folly, but you ’ re not a boy anymore, however many years you ’ ve seen . That ’ s a man ’ s sword you have there, and it will take a man to wield her . I ’ ll expect you to act the part, henceforth.Yet he saw the castle clear in his mind ’ s eye, as if he had left it only yesterday; the towering granite walls, the Great Hall with its smells of smoke and dog and roasting meat, his father ’ s solar, the turret room where he had slept . Part of him wanted nothing so much as to hear Bran laugh again, to sup on one of Gage ’ s beef-and-bacon pies, to listen to Old Nan tell her tales of the children of the forest and Florian the Fool.But the truth was terrible . Castle Black had no defenses, but for the Wall itself . It lacked even wooden palisades or earthen dikes . The castle was nothing more than a cluster of towers and keeps, two-thirds of them falling into ruin . As for the garrison, the Old Bear had taken two hundred on his ranging . Had any returned? Jon could not know . Perhaps four hundred remained at the castle, but most of those were builders or stewards, not rangers.For me too, Robb said . He had snow in his hair, melting from the heat of his body . Did you see him?That wolf ’ s looking at you hungry, girl, Lark said . Might be it fancies that tender bit in your belly.Jon snapped angrily . [BOS] Stop it! [EOS] You want to serve, or shall I?Something ’ s wrong, Jon thought . Something ’ s very wrong.The Lord of Ham thinks he ’ s too good to eat with the likes of us, suggested Jeren.They all fell silent, listening . Jon found himself holding his breath . Sam, he thought . He hadn ’ t gone to the Old Bear, but he hadn ’ t gone to bed either, he ’ d woken the other boys . Damn them all . Come dawn, if they were not in their beds, they ’ d be named deserters too . What did they think they were doing?Ghost ran with them for a time and then vanished among the trees . Without the direwolf, Jon felt almost naked . He found himself glancing at every shadow with unease . Unbidden, he thought back on the tales that Old Nan used to tell them, when he was a boy at Winterfell . He could almost hear her voice again, and the click-click-click of her needles . In that darkness, the Others came riding, she used to say, dropping her voice lower and lower . Cold and dead they were, and they hated iron and fire and the touch of the sun, and every living creature with hot blood in its veins . Holdfasts and cities and kingdoms of men all fell before them, as they moved south on pale dead horses, leading hosts of the slain . They fed their dead servants on the flesh of human children …I can walk.And suddenly Jon Snow was ashamed.so learn well the words of my song.Face reddening, Jon descended the slope to where Rattleshirt sat his horse . The wildling stared at him through the eyeholes of his helm, and said, The free folk have no need of cravens.Is your sword sharp, Jon Snow? asked Qhorin Halfhand across the flickering fire.Mormont continued . Aemon was at his books when the eldest of his uncles, the heir apparent, was slain in a tourney mishap . He left two sons, but they followed him to the grave not long after, during the Great Spring Sickness . King Daeron was also taken, so the crown passed to Daeron ’ s second son, Aerys.It was well past dark and the storm was raging by the time they reached the place . The village sat beside a lake, and had been so long abandoned that most of the houses had collapsed . Even the small timber inn that must once have been a welcome sight for travelers stood half-fallen and roofless . We will find scant shelter here, Jon thought gloomily . Whenever the lightning flashed he could see a stone roundtower rising from an island out in the lake, but without boats they had no way to reach it.We do not ride for the Wall . We ride north, after Mance Rayder and these Others, these white shadows and their wights . We seek them, Gilly . Your babe would not be safe with us.You did, said Tormund . You slew the two she was with and carried her off, what do you call it?Thorne was much the more clever of the two, Jon realized; this had his stink all over it . He was trapped . I ’ ll go, he said in a clipped, curt voice.Benjen gave Jon a careful, measuring look . You don ’ t miss much, do you, Jon? We could use a man like you on the Wall.And so they were, he thought to himself after Sam had taken his leave . Robb and Bran and Rickon were his father ’ s sons, and he loved them still, yet Jon knew that he had never truly been one of them . Catelyn Stark had seen to that . The grey walls of Winterfell might still haunt his dreams, but Castle Black was his life now, and his brothers were Sam and Grenn and Halder and Pyp and the other cast-outs who wore the black of the Night ’ s Watch.She doesn ’ t know how many . Why come here?At first Jon had nursed the hope that Squire Dalbridge would keep the wildlings bottled up in the pass . But when they ’ d heard the call of a far-off horn every man of them knew the squire had fallen . Later they spied the eagle soaring through the dusk on great blue-grey wings and Stonesnake unslung his bow, but the bird flew out of range before he could so much as string it . Ebben spat and muttered darkly of wargs and skinchangers.Mance nodded . Good . You ’ ll go with Jarl and Styr on the morrow, then . Both of you . Far be it from me to separate two hearts that beat as one.Stannis turned to study him . Beneath his heavy brow were eyes like bottomless blue pools . His hollow cheeks and strong jaw were covered with a short-cropped blue-black beard that did little to conceal the gauntness of his face, and his teeth were clenched . His neck and shoulders were clenched as well, and his right hand . Jon found himself remembering something Donal Noye once said about the Baratheon brothers . Robert was the true steel . Stannis is pure iron, black and hard and strong, but brittle, the way iron gets . He ’ ll break before he bends . Uneasily, he knelt, wondering why this brittle king had need of him.As the last strains of The Dornishman ’ s Wife faded, the bald earless man glanced up from his map and scowled ferociously at Rattleshirt and Ygritte, with Jon between them . What ’ s this? he said . A crow?Maybe he never washes, so he smells as rank as a bear.Aye . All that, and more . You are a warg too, they say, a skinchanger who walks at night as a wolf . King Stannis had a hard smile . How much of it is true?None of us are here for asking, Sam reminded him.There were cookfires all along the river, amongst wayns and carts and sleds . Many of the wildlings had thrown up tents, of hide and skin and felted wool . Others sheltered behind rocks in crude lean-tos, or slept beneath their wagons . At one fire Jon saw a man hardening the points of long wooden spears and tossing them in a pile . Elsewhere two bearded youths in boiled leather were sparring with staffs, leaping at each other over the flames, grunting each time one landed a blow . A dozen women sat nearby in a circle, fletching arrows.Yes, Jon . It need not be for long . Only until such time as the garrison returns . Donal chose you, and Qhorin Halfhand before him . Lord Commander Mormont made you his steward . You are a son of Winterfell, a nephew of Benjen Stark . It must be you or no one . The Wall is yours, Jon Snow.Marsh turned his smile on Jon . Lord Commander Mormont has requested you for his personal steward, Jon . You ’ ll sleep in a cell beneath his chambers, in the Lord Commander ’ s tower.Ser Jaremy, the Old Bear asked gruffly, Ben Stark had six men with him when he rode from the Wall . Where are the others?Jon flexed the fingers of his sword hand . [BOS] I ’ m no crow, and won ’ t be called a liar . [EOS] What happened to them?He sniffed at the bark, smelled wolf and tree and boy, but behind that there were other scents, the rich brown smell of warm earth and the hard grey smell of stone and something else, something terrible . Death, he knew . He was smelling death . He cringed back, his hair bristling, and bared his fangs.And if I had slain her? asked Jon.Jon agreed . Even the words were an effort . [BOS] My leg, [EOS] Jon watched her go, his joy in the morning ’ s brittle beauty gone . Damn her, he thought resentfully, and damn Sam twice for sending her to me . What did he think I could do for her? We ’ re here to fight wildlings, not save them.Jon sat up . [BOS] Ygritte, I never stole you . [EOS] Thoren Smallwood swore that Craster was a friend to the Watch, despite his unsavory reputation . The man ’ s half-mad, I won ’ t deny it, he ’ d told the Old Bear, but you ’ d be the same if you ’ d spent your life in this cursed wood . Even so, he ’ s never turned a ranger away from his fire, nor does he love Mance Rayder . He ’ ll give us good counsel.They had four of the big oak barrels lined up above the gate by the time Pyp shouted, Jon braced his injured leg and leaned out for a look . Hoardings, Marsh should have built hoardings . So many things they should have done . The wildlings were dragging the dead giants away from the gate . Horse and Mully were dropping rocks down on them, and Jon thought he saw one man go down, but the stones were too small to have any effect on the turtle itself . He wondered what the free folk would do about the dead mammoth in the path, but then he saw . The turtle was almost as wide as a longhall, so they simply pushed it over the carcass . His leg twitched, but Horse caught his arm and drew him back to safety . [BOS] There ’ s a turtle at our door! You shouldn ’ t lean out like that, [EOS] the boy said.Her face did not change . Her long auburn hair was dull and tangled . She looked as though she had aged twenty years . You ’ ve said it . Now go away.It was warm within . A small fire burned beneath the smoke holes, and a brazier smouldered near the pile of furs where Dalla lay, pale and sweating . Her sister was holding her hand . Val, Jon remembered . I was sorry when Jarl fell, he told her.He was the best of us, said the Halfhand, and the worst as well . Only fools like Thoren Smallwood despise the wildlings . They are as brave as we are, Jon . As strong, as quick, as clever . But they have no discipline . They name themselves the free folk, and each one thinks himself as good as a king and wiser than a maester . Mance was the same . He never learned how to obey.Jon nuzzled her hair and filled his nose with the smell of her . [BOS] You sound like Old Nan, telling Bran a monster story . [EOS] Jon lowered the sword . [BOS] Why? [EOS] he said, stupidly.It ’ s me who ’ ll ask the questions, the jowly man replied . You ’ ve been charged with oathbreaking, cowardice, and desertion, Jon Snow . Do you deny that you abandoned your brothers to die on the Fist of the First Men and joined the wildling Mance Rayder, this self-styled King-beyond-the-Wall?For a moment Jon thought he had misheard . It had sounded as if Noye were leaving him in command . My lord?Sam stared at the last of his pork pie and gave a feeble shake of his head, too scared even to talk . A burst of laughter filled the hall . Jon heard Pyp squeaking in a high voice . He stood . Let ’ s go outside.Yes, my lord . Jon slid the sword back into the silver-banded scabbard . If not the blade he would have chosen, it was nonetheless a noble gift, and freeing him from Alliser Thorne ’ s malignance was nobler still.Even so, Ebben would have loosed a shaft at it, but the squire stopped him . The bird ’ s well out of bowshot.My uncle spoke truly, he whispered to Ghost . He wondered if he would ever see Benjen Stark again, to tell him.Yes, this place will do . The Old Bear lifted a hand to the wind, and raven landed on his forearm, claws scrabbling against his black ringmail.Up ahead a hunting horn sounded a quavering note, half drowned beneath the constant patter of the rain . Buckwell ’ s horn, the Old Bear announced . The gods are good; Craster ’ s still there . His raven gave a single flap of his big wings, croaked Corn, and ruffled his feathers up again.Ygritte helped pull him up . He ’ s bleeding like a butchered boar . Look what Orell did t ’ his sweet face.Follard never made a sound, only toppled forward headlong over the parapet . It was a hundred feet to the yard below . Jon heard the thump as he was peering round a straw soldier, trying to see where the arrow had come from . Not ten feet from Deaf Dick ’ s body, he glimpsed a leather shield, a ragged cloak, a mop of thick red hair . Kissed by fire, he thought, lucky . He brought his bow up, but his fingers would not part, and she was gone as suddenly as she ’ d appeared . He swiveled, cursing, and loosed a shaft at the men on the armory roof instead, but he missed them as well.Not for fear! She kicked savagely at the ice beneath her with a heel, chopping out a chunk . I ’ m crying because we never found the Horn of Winter . We opened half a hundred graves and let all those shades loose in the world, and never found the Horn of Joramun to bring this cold thing down!The harsh words had blown away whatever sympathy Jon might have had for Stannis . I loved my brother, he said.I suppose it was also the Halfhand who commanded you to fuck this unwashed whore? Ser Alliser asked with a smirk.There are older men, Jon wanted to say, better men . I am still as green as summer grass . I ’ m wounded, and I stand accused of desertion . His mouth had gone bone dry . Aye, he managed.Well, that ’ s one thing we won ’ t face in the wood.He could see the kingsroad wending its way south through stony brown fields and over windswept hills . The Magnar would be coming up that road before the day was done, his Thenns marching behind him with axes and spears in their hands and their bronze-and-leather shields on their backs . Grigg the Goat, Quort, Big Boil, and the rest will be coming as well . And Ygritte . The wildlings had never been his friends, he had not allowed them to be his friends, but her . . .Have I? Sam looked startled.Samwell Tarly nodded . I … if you want, you can call me Sam . My mother calls me Sam.Lannister studied his face . Yes, he said . I can see it . You have more of the north in you than your brothers.He made himself eat, hungry or no . Bad enough he could not sleep, he could not go on without food as well . Besides, this might be my last meal . It might be the last meal for all of us . So it was that Jon had a belly full of bread, bacon, onions, and cheese when he heard Horse shout, IT ’ S COMING!After that the days and nights blurred one into the other . They slept in their saddles and stopped only long enough to feed and water the garrons, then mounted up again . Over bare rock they rode, through gloomy pine forests and drifts of old snow, over icy ridges and across shallow rivers that had no names . Sometimes Qhorin or Stonesnake would loop back to sweep away their tracks, but it was a futile gesture . They were watched . At every dawn and every dusk they saw the eagle soaring between the peaks, no more than a speck in the vastness of the sky.The Old Bear snorted . Do you think they chose me Lord Commander of the Night ’ s Watch because I ’ m dumb as a stump, Snow? Aemon told me you ’ d go . I told him you ’ d be back . I know my men … and my boys too . Honor set you on the kingsroad … and honor brought you back.Arya glanced behind her, saw Jon, and jumped to her feet . She threw her skinny arms tight around his neck . I was afraid you were gone, she said, her breath catching in her throat . They wouldn ’ t let me out to say good-bye.That old maester says I cannot hang you, Slynt declared . He has written Cotter Pyke, and even had the bloody gall to show me the letter . He says you are no turncloak.Jon asked . [BOS] Shall I bring you supper, my lord? [EOS] Patrols, aye . Twice a day, if we can . The Wall itself is a formidable obstacle . Undefended, it cannot stop them, yet it will delay them . The larger the host, the longer they ’ ll require . From the emptiness they ’ ve left behind, they must mean to bring their women with them . Their young as well, and beasts . . . have you ever seen a goat climb a ladder? A rope? They will need to build a stair, or a great ramp . . . it will take a moon ’ s turn at the least, perhaps longer . Mance will know his best chance is to pass beneath the Wall . Through a gate, or . . .Jon could taste the mockery there, but there was no denying the truth . The Watch had built nineteen great strongholds along the Wall, but only three were still occupied: Eastwatch on its grey windswept shore, the Shadow Tower hard by the mountains where the Wall ended, and Castle Black between them, at the end of the kingsroad . The other keeps, long deserted, were lonely, haunted places, where cold winds whistled through black windows and the spirits of the dead manned the parapets.Ghost found it . The blade was wrapped in a ranger ’ s cloak and buried beneath the Fist of the First Men . There were other blades as well . . . spearheads, arrowheads, all dragonglass.The wildlings came boiling over a ridge not half a mile away . Their hounds ran before them, snarling grey-brown beasts with more than a little wolf in their blood . Ghost bared his teeth, his fur bristling . Jon murmured . [BOS] Easy, Stay . [EOS] Overhead he heard a rustle of wings . The eagle landed on an outcrop of rock and screamed in triumph.Another voice broke in . You know where I ’ d be if it was me? I ’ d be in Mole ’ s Town, digging for buried treasure . Toad ’ s shrill laughter boomed through the trees . Jon ’ s mare snorted.At Winterfell one of the serving women told us stories, Jon went on . She used to say that there were wildlings who would lay with the Others to birth half-human children.These heights will be easy to defend, if need be, Thoren pointed out as he walked his horse along the ring of stones, his sable-trimmed cloak stirring in the wind.Halder looked to Ser Alliser.Jon flexed his bandaged fingers to show him . He had burned himself more badly than he knew throwing the flaming drapes, and his right hand was swathed in silk halfway to the elbow . At the time he ’ d felt nothing; the agony had come after . His cracked red skin oozed fluid, and fearsome blood blisters rose between his fingers, big as roaches . [BOS] Healing . The maester says I ’ ll have scars, but otherwise the hand should be as good as it was before . [EOS] He could carry the message back to Castle Black and tell them of the horn, but if he left Mance still alive Lord Janos and Ser Alliser would seize on that as proof that he was a turncloak . A thousand thoughts flickered through Jon ’ s head . If I can destroy the horn, smash it here and now . . . but before he could begin to think that through, he heard the low moan of some other horn, made faint by the tent ’ s hide walls . Mance heard it too . Frowning, he went to the door . Jon followed.That did not please the king . Stannis ground his teeth and said, I need more than a sword from you.Jon kicked the axe well out of the girl ’ s reach . [BOS] I won ’ t give her half a chance . Do you have a name? [EOS] King, the bird said again.Is that what you did, little sister?No sorc— he began, as a huge bolt of lightning stabbed down from the sky and touched the surface of the lake . For half a heartbeat the world was noonday bright . The clap of thunder was so loud that Ygritte gasped and covered her ears.After a moment a stooped, round-shouldered little man in black peered out . His small pink eyes widened at the sight of Jon . Lay the lad down, I ’ ll fetch the maester.Your half brothers, a voice inside reminded him . And Lady Stark, who will not welcome you . There was no place for him in Winterfell, no place in King ’ s Landing either . Even his own mother had not had a place for him . The thought of her made him sad . He wondered who she had been, what she had looked like, why his father had left her . Because she was a whore or an adulteress, fool . Something dark and dishonorable, or else why was Lord Eddard too ashamed to speak of her?Yes . Jon knelt, and Sam knelt beside him.Yes? he said.It seemed to sprout from solid rock, its pale roots twisting up from a myriad of fissures and hairline cracks . The tree was slender compared to other weirwoods he had seen, no more than a sapling, yet it was growing as he watched, its limbs thickening as they reached for the sky . Wary, he circled the smooth white trunk until he came to the face . Red eyes looked at him . Fierce eyes they were, yet glad to see him . The weirwood had his brother ’ s face . Had his brother always had three eyes?As you say, my lord . It was not the thought of scars that troubled Jon; it was the rest of it . Maester Aemon had given him milk of the poppy, yet even so, the pain had been hideous . At first it had felt as if his hand were still aflame, burning day and night . Only plunging it into basins of snow and shaved ice gave any relief at all . Jon thanked the gods that no one but Ghost saw him writhing on his bed, whimpering from the pain . And when at last he did sleep, he dreamt, and that was even worse . In the dream, the corpse he fought had blue eyes, black hands, and his father ’ s face, but he dared not tell Mormont that.Squatting beside the dead man he had named Jafer Flowers, Ser Jaremy grasped his head by the scalp . The hair came out between his fingers, brittle as straw . The knight cursed and shoved at the face with the heel of his hand . A great gash in the side of the corpse ’ s neck opened like a mouth, crusted with dried blood . Only a few ropes of pale tendon still attached the head to the neck . This was done with an axe.The woman had a terrible temper, and she put up quite the fight when I laid hands on her . It was all I could do to carry her home and get her out o ’ them furs, but when I did, oh, she was hotter even than I remembered, and we had a fine old time, and then I went to sleep . Next morning when I woke the snow had stopped and the sun was shining, but I was in no fit state to enjoy it . All ripped and torn I was, and half me member bit right off, and there on me floor was a she-bear ’ s pelt . And soon enough the free folk were telling tales o ’ this bald bear seen in the woods, with the queerest pair o ’ cubs behind her . Har! He slapped a meaty thigh . Would that I could find her again . She was fine to lay with, that bear . Never was a woman gave me such a fight, nor such strong sons neither.Chett gave an angry scowl . I ’ m a steward . You think it ’ s easy work, fit for cowards? The order of stewards keeps the Watch alive . We hunt and farm, tend the horses, milk the cows, gather firewood, cook the meals . Who do you think makes your clothing? Who brings up supplies from the south? The stewards.Ygritte hooted at him . You want to guard him? If you want us to do it, leave us be and we ’ ll do it.Surprisingly, Stannis smiled at that . You ’ re bold enough to be a Stark . Yes, I should have come sooner . If not for my Hand, I might not have come at all . Lord Seaworth is a man of humble birth, but he reminded me of my duty, when all I could think of was my rights . I had the cart before the horse, Davos said . I was trying to win the throne to save the kingdom, when I should have been trying to save the kingdom to win the throne . Stannis pointed north . There is where I ’ ll find the foe that I was born to fight.You are fond of this Val?When the dead walk, walls and stakes and swords mean nothing, he remembered . You cannot fight the dead, Jon Snow . No man knows that half so well as me.I ’ ve told you the truth . Our garrons were failing, and Rattleshirt was close behind us . Qhorin told me to pretend to join the wildlings . ‘ You must not balk, whatever is asked of you, ’ he said . He knew they would make me kill him . Rattleshirt was going to kill him anyway, he knew that too.Jon had his boot wedged solidly in the door . [BOS] I can stand here all night if I must . [EOS] I can be fast, Arya said.There was no use telling him that Robert Baratheon was dead . He would forget it, as he ’ d forgotten it before . Jon agreed . That seemed to make Owen happy . [BOS] Maester Aemon sent him a bird, [EOS] Othell Yarwyck stood up slowly, frowning . The big builder rubbed his long lantern jaw and said, Well, I ’ m pulling my name out . If you wanted me, you had ten chances to choose me, and you didn ’ t . Not enough of you, anyway . I was going to say that those who were casting a token for me ought to choose Lord Janos . . .Be that as it may, said Mormont . It is not for me to say . Nor for you.Beneath the trees were all the wildlings in the world; raiders and giants, wargs and skinchangers, mountain men, salt sea sailors, ice river cannibals, cave dwellers with dyed faces, dog chariots from the Frozen Shore, Hornfoot men with their soles like boiled leather, all the queer wild folk Mance had gathered to break the Wall . This is not your land, Jon wanted to shout at them . There is no place for you here . Go away . He could hear Tormund Giantsbane laughing at that . You know nothing, Jon Snow, Ygritte would have said . He flexed his sword hand, opening and closing the fingers, though he knew full well that swords would not come into it up here.Waits, the raven cried . Waits.Maester Aemon thinks you clever . Mormont moved the raven to his shoulder . The bird tilted its head to one side, little eyes a-glitter.It can ’ t be, Jon told himself . This is the Lord Commander ’ s Tower, it ’ s guarded day and night, this couldn ’ t happen, it ’ s a dream, I ’ m having a nightmare.All Jon could hear was the falling water and the faint crackle of flames . This way under the Wall was lost as well?They know, Jon realized . My father is no traitor, he said hoarsely . Even the words stuck in his throat, as if to choke him . The wind was rising, and it seemed colder in the yard than it had when he ’ d gone in . Spirit summer was drawing to an end.She even claimed we were kin . She told me a story . . .But it was Dywen who emerged from the greenery, forking a shaggy grey garron with Grenn ahorse beside him . The Old Bear had deployed outriders to either side of the main column, to screen their march and warn of the approach of any enemies, and even there he took no chances, sending the men out in pairs.The singer rose to his feet . I ’ m Mance Rayder, he said as he put aside the lute . And you are Ned Stark ’ s bastard, the Snow of Winterfell.Jon had to crawl a dozen paces before the cave opened up around him . When he stood again, it took his eyes a moment to adjust . Ygritte had brought a torch, but there was no other light . She stood beside a little waterfall that fell from a cleft in the rock down into a wide dark pool . The orange and yellow flames shone against the pale green water.Lord Steward Bowen Marsh rubbed his plump hands together . Samwell, you will assist Maester Aemon in the rookery and library . Chett is going to the kennels, to help with the hounds . You shall have his cell, so as to be close to the maester night and day . I trust you will take good care of him . He is very old and very precious to us.Soon enough, Robb promised . He pulled Jon to him and embraced him fiercely . Farewell, Snow.Yes, m ’ lord! When Slynt scowled, his jowls quivered . He was as broad as the Old Bear had been, and no doubt would be as bald if he lived to Mormont ’ s age . Half his hair was gone already, though he could not have been more than forty.Ygritte stepped in front of Jon . You can ’ t kill a man for lying to protect them as was his brothers.The Lord o ’ Bones, the Weeper said when he saw them . He eyed Jon and his wolf . Who ’ s this, then?When Jon had been Bran ’ s age, he had dreamed of doing great deeds, as boys always did . The details of his feats changed with every dreaming, but quite often he imagined saving his father ’ s life . Afterward Lord Eddard would declare that Jon had proved himself a true Stark, and place Ice in his hand . Even then he had known it was only a child ’ s folly; no bastard could ever hope to wield a father ’ s sword . Even the memory shamed him . What kind of man stole his own brother ’ s birthright? I have no right to this, he thought, no more than to Ice . He twitched his burned fingers, feeling a throb of pain deep under the skin . My lord, you honor me, but—Or they will find us, thought Jon.Longclaw was not so long or heavy a sword as his father ’ s Ice, but it was Valyrian steel all the same . He touched the edge of the blade to mark where the blow must fall, and Ygritte shivered . That ’ s cold, she said . Go on, be quick about it.He shut the door and pulled the bell cord . The winch began to turn . They rose . The day was bright and the Wall was weeping, long fingers of water trickling down its face and glinting in the sun . In the close confines of the iron cage, he was acutely aware of the red woman ’ s presence . She even smells red . The scent reminded him of Mikken ’ s forge, of the way iron smelled when red-hot; the scent was smoke and blood . Kissed by fire, he thought, remembering Ygritte . The wind got in amongst Melisandre ’ s long red robes and sent them flapping against Jon ’ s legs as he stood beside her . You are not cold, my lady? he asked her.Good, she whispered . I wanted t ’ see one proper castle, before . . . before I . . .Maester Aemon ’ s apartments were in a stout wooden keep below the rookery . Aged and frail, the maester shared his chambers with two of the younger stewards, who tended to his needs and helped him in his duties . The brothers joked that he had been given the two ugliest men in the Night ’ s Watch; being blind, he was spared having to look at them . Clydas was short, bald, and chinless, with small pink eyes like a mole . Chett had a wen on his neck the size of a pigeon ’ s egg, and a face red with boils and pimples . Perhaps that was why he always seemed so angry.Yes . To be sure . The Old Bear unrolled a map, frowned at it, tossed it aside, opened another . He was pondering where the hammer would fall, Jon could see it . The Watch had once manned seventeen castles along the hundred leagues of the Wall, but they had been abandoned one by one as the brotherhood dwindled . Only three were now garrisoned, a fact that Mance Rayder knew as well as they did . Ser Alliser Thorne will bring back fresh levies from King ’ s Landing, we can hope . If we man Greyguard from the Shadow Tower and the Long Barrow from Eastwatch . . .Moonlight silvered the hills as he followed the twisting ribbon of the kingsroad . He needed to get as far from the Wall as he could before they realized he was gone . On the morrow he would leave the road and strike out overland through field and bush and stream to throw off pursuit, but for the moment speed was more important than deception . It was not as though they would not guess where he was going.He could not see the smile . Hard as he tried, he could not see it . He found himself thinking of the deserter his father had beheaded the day they ’ d found the direwolves . You said the words, Lord Eddard had told him . You took a vow, before your brothers, before the old gods and the new . Desmond and Fat Tom had dragged the man to the stump . Bran ’ s eyes had been wide as saucers, and Jon had to remind him to keep his pony in hand . He remembered the look on Father ’ s face when Theon Greyjoy brought forth Ice, the spray of blood on the snow, the way Theon had kicked the head when it came rolling at his feet.Back? Jon was taken by surprise.It seems a strong place, said Sam . A ringfort of the First Men . Do you think there were battles fought here?Crow . Jon thought the raven sounded faintly indignant.They ’ re not wearing skins, Jon realized . That ’ s hair . Shaggy pelts covered their bodies, thick below the waist, sparser above . The stink that came off them was choking, but perhaps that was the mammoths . And Joramun blew the Horn of Winter, and woke giants from the earth . He looked for great swords ten feet long, but saw only clubs . Most were just the limbs of dead trees, some still trailing shattered branches . A few had stone balls lashed to the ends to make colossal mauls . The song never says if the horn can put them back to sleep.I thought I had forgotten that . Jon could taste blood in his mouth, from the blow he ’ d taken.As the stars began to fade in the eastern sky, the Wall appeared before him, rising above the trees and the morning mists . Moonlight glimmered pale against the ice . He urged the gelding on, following the muddy slick road until he saw the stone towers and timbered halls of Castle Black huddled like broken toys beneath the great cliff of ice . By then the Wall glowed pink and purple with the first light of dawn.You broke my wrist, bastard boy.When he heard the rattle of the winch chains and the iron groan of the cage door opening, he knew it would be Hobb bringing their breakfast as he did every morning . The sight of Mance ’ s turtle had robbed Jon of his appetite . Their oil was all but gone, and the last barrel of pitch had been rolled off the Wall two nights ago . They would soon run short of arrows as well, and there were no fletchers making more . And the night before last, a raven had come from the west, from Ser Denys Mallister . Bowen Marsh had chased the wildlings all the way to the Shadow Tower, it seemed, and then farther, down into the gloom of the Gorge . At the Bridge of Skulls he had met the Weeper and three hundred wildlings and won a bloody battle . But the victory had been a costly one . More than a hundred brothers slain, among them Ser Endrew Tarth and Ser Aladale Wynch . The Old Pomegranate himself had been carried back to the Shadow Tower sorely wounded . Maester Mullin was tending him, but it would be some time before he was fit to return to Castle Black.His guard was sprawled bonelessly across the narrow steps, looking up at him . Looking up at him, even though he was lying on his stomach . His head had been twisted completely around.The horse was well lathered, so Jon took the lead and walked her for a while . The road was scarcely wide enough for two riders to pass abreast, its surface cut by tiny streams and littered with stone . That run had been truly stupid, an invitation to a broken neck . Jon wondered what had gotten into him . Was he in such a great rush to die?It ’ s only blood, Jon Snow . He missed the eye, just ripped your skin up some.Robb looked relieved . Good . He smiled . The next time I see you, you ’ ll be all in black.Will the wildlings come today, Lord Snow? Owen asked.And when they looked up Jarl and his team were gone . Men, ropes, stakes, all gone; nothing remained above six hundred feet . There was a wound in the Wall where the climbers had clung half a heartbeat before, the ice within as smooth and white as polished marble and shining in the sun . Far far below there was a faint red smear where someone had smashed against a frozen pinnace.The direwolf trotted to him . Jon heard Samwell Tarly ’ s sharp intake of breath.More ’ n you ever will, brother . Well, it ’ s not so hard when you breed your own . There ’ s your beast, Snow.Your lies won ’ t save you now, Lord Snow, warned Ser Alliser Thorne . We ’ ll have the truth from you, bastard.And now they come, said Qhorin.Mance shook his head . The Others never come when the sun is up . Chariots were rattling across the killing ground, jammed with riders waving spears of sharpened bone . The king groaned . Where the bloody hell do they think they ’ re going? Quenn, get those fools back where they belong . Someone bring my horse . The mare, not the stallion . I ’ ll want my armor too . Mance glanced suspiciously at the Wall . Atop the icy parapets, the straw soldiers stood collecting arrows, but there was no sign of any other activity . Harma, mount up your raiders . Tormund, find your sons and give me a triple line of spears.He remembered Robb as he had last seen him, standing in the yard with snow melting in his auburn hair . Jon would have to come to him in secret, disguised . He tried to imagine the look on Robb ’ s face when he revealed himself . His brother would shake his head and smile, and he ’ d say … he ’ d say …Aye, said Cotter Pyke . And you can start by telling those king ’ s men that it ’ s done, and we want our bloody supper.Dareon and Sam left with him . They descended to the yard in silence . Outside, Jon looked up at the Wall shining in the sun, the melting ice creeping down its side in a hundred thin fingers . Jon ’ s rage was such that he would have smashed it all in an instant, and the world be damned.Jon clapped him on the shoulder with his burned hand . They walked back through the camp together . Cookfires were being lit all around them . Overhead, the stars were coming out . The long red tail of Mormont ’ s Torch burned as bright as the moon . Jon heard the ravens before he saw them . Some were calling his name . The birds were not shy when it came to making noise.I did say it, for I was.No . The Aurochs lost.Tyrion Lannister had claimed that most men would rather deny a hard truth than face it, but Jon was done with denials . He was who he was; Jon Snow, bastard and oathbreaker, motherless, friendless, and damned . For the rest of his life—however long that might be—he would be condemned to be an outsider, the silent man standing in the shadows who dares not speak his true name . Wherever he might go throughout the Seven Kingdoms, he would need to live a lie, lest every man ’ s hand be raised against him . But it made no matter, so long as he lived long enough to take his place by his brother ’ s side and help avenge his father.Ghost, Jon wanted to shout, where are you?Mully yanked the bell rope three times . A moment later they began to rise, by fits and starts at first, then more smoothly . No one spoke . At the top the cage swung sideways and they clambered out one by one . Horse gave Jon a hand down onto the ice . The cold hit him in the teeth like a fist.Man and boy I ’ ve served the Watch, and ranged as far as any, said Ebben . I ’ ve seen the bones of giants, and heard many a queer tale, but no more . I want to see them with my own eyes.King! cried Mormont ’ s raven . King, king, king.And what brings you up the Milkwater, so far from the fires of home? He did not wait for Jon ’ s answer, but looked at once to Rattleshirt . How many were they?That ’ s a tale for later, said Mance Rayder . How did you like the song, lad?Whilst your brothers have been struggling to decide who shall lead them, I have been speaking with this Mance Rayder . He ground his teeth . A stubborn man, that one, and prideful . He will leave me no choice but to give him to the flames . But we took other captives as well, other leaders . The one who calls himself the Lord of Bones, some of their clan chiefs, the new Magnar of Thenn . Your brothers will not like it, no more than your father ’ s lords, but I mean to allow the wildlings through the Wall . . . those who will swear me their fealty, pledge to keep the king ’ s peace and the king ’ s laws, and take the Lord of Light as their god . Even the giants, if those great knees of theirs can bend . I will settle them on the Gift, once I have wrested it away from your new Lord Commander . When the cold winds rise, we shall live or die together . It is time we made alliance against our common foe . He looked at Jon . Would you agree?Did I offend you? Lannister said . Sorry . Dwarfs don ’ t have to be tactful . Generations of capering fools in motley have won me the right to dress badly and say any damn thing that comes into my head . He grinned . You are the bastard, though.And the cost?Is Stonedoor manned at present? asked Jarl . Greyguard?Does this mean my dreams are true as well? asked Squire Dalbridge . Lord Snow can keep his mammoths, I want my women.Qhorin ’ s shrewd grey eyes seemed to see right through him . So you let her go? He did not sound the least surprised.None else . Despite fever, exhaustion, his leg, the Magnar, the old man, Ygritte, Mance, despite it all, Jon smiled . It was good to be back, good to see Noye with his big belly and pinned-up sleeve, his jaw bristling with black stubble.But the fighting was done . There ’ s only one of them, Errok said when he came back . An old man with a horse.Jon lifted his sword … and lowered it, helpless . Damn you, he said . Damn you all.I am no man ’ s pet, said Jarl, dark and fierce.We ’ re all scared . We ’ d be fools if we weren ’ t. Too many rangers had been lost the past two years, even Benjen Stark, Jon ’ s uncle . They had found two of his uncle ’ s men in the wood, slain, but the corpses had risen in the chill of night . Jon ’ s burnt fingers twitched as he remembered . He still saw the wight in his dreams, dead Othor with the burning blue eyes and the cold black hands, but that was the last thing Sam needed to be reminded of . There ’ s no shame in fear, my father told me, what matters is how we face it . Come, I ’ ll help you gather up the maps.The boy claimed to be eighteen, older than Jon, but he was green as summer grass for all that . Satin, they called him, even in the wool and mail and boiled leather of the Night ’ s Watch; the name he ’ d gotten in the brothel where he ’ d been born and raised . He was pretty as a girl with his dark eyes, soft skin, and raven ’ s ringlets . Half a year at Castle Black had toughened up his hands, however, and Noye said he was passable with a crossbow . Whether he had the courage to face what was coming, though . . .The proving had been so sweet, though, and Ygritte had gone to sleep beside him with her head against his chest, and that was sweet as well, dangerously sweet . He thought of the weirwoods again, and the words he ’ d said before them . It was only once, and it had to be . Even my father stumbled once, when he forgot his marriage vows and sired a bastard . Jon vowed to himself that it would be the same with him . It will never happen again.I would not . Grenn sounded peeved . I ’ d just ride south, you can tell south by the stars.Ghost padded restlessly by Jon ’ s side . From time to time he would stop and turn, his ears pricked, as if he heard something behind them . Jon did not think the shadowcats would attack living men, not unless they were starving, but he loosened Longclaw in its scabbard even so.Like Ice, she said . She looked at the blade in her hand . Does this have a name? Oh, tell me.Jon asked him . [BOS] Did Sam sleep in the hall last night? [EOS] Last night he had dreamt the Winterfell dream again . He was wandering the empty castle, searching for his father, descending into the crypts . Only this time the dream had gone further than before . In the dark he ’ d heard the scrape of stone on stone . When he turned he saw that the vaults were opening, one after the other . As the dead kings came stumbling from their cold black graves, Jon had woken in pitch-dark, his heart hammering . Even when Ghost leapt up on the bed to nuzzle at his face, he could not shake his deep sense of terror . He dared not go back to sleep . Instead he had climbed the Wall and walked, restless, until he saw the light of the dawn off to the east . It was only a dream . I am a brother of the Night ’ s Watch now, not a frightened boy.Jon said softly . [BOS] Untouched, And Ghost is different . The dogs and the horses won ’ t go near them . [EOS] A deep restlessness was on him as he went back to Hardin ’ s Tower for Ghost . The direwolf walked beside him to the stables . Some of the more skittish horses kicked at their stalls and laid back their ears as they entered . Jon saddled his mare, mounted, and rode out from Castle Black, south across the moonlit night . Ghost raced ahead of him, flying over the ground, gone in the blink of an eye . Jon let him go . A wolf needed to hunt.The dream was sweet . . . but Winterfell would never be his to show . It belonged to his brother, the King in the North . He was a Snow, not a Stark . Bastard, oathbreaker, and turncloak . . .The fat boy shuddered . I hate it . He looked as though he was going to cry again.My mother always said rain was good for growing crops, Grenn put in hopefully.That was too much . Jon wrenched free of his friends and retreated to the armory, alone . His ears were still ringing from the blow Emmett had dealt him . He sat on the bench and buried his head in his hands . Why am I so angry? he asked himself, but it was a stupid question . Lord of Winterfell . I could be the Lord of Winterfell . My father ’ s heir.Jon could scarcely follow what he was saying . [BOS] My lord, I don ’ t understand . What ’ s happened to my father? [EOS] Sam came puffing up as Jon crossed the camp . Under the black hood his face was as pale and round as the moon . I heard the horn . Has your uncle come back?Edd cut three thick slices off a stale round of oat bread, stacked them on a wooden platter, covered them with bacon and bacon drippings, and filled a bowl with hard-cooked eggs . Jon took the bowl in one hand and the platter in the other and backed into the Lord Commander ’ s tent.Jon pulled the goose feather back to his ear, aimed, and loosed the arrow, then nocked and drew and loosed again . The first shaft pierced the bearclaw shield, the second one a throat . The wildling screamed as he went down . He heard the deep thrum of Deaf Dick ’ s crossbow to his left, and Satin ’ s a moment later . I got one! the boy cried hoarsely . I got one in the chest.Benjen Stark stood up . More ’ s the pity . He put a hand on Jon ’ s shoulder . Come back to me after you ’ ve fathered a few bastards of your own, and we ’ ll see how you feel.They ’ ll have a horn, said Stonesnake.It may not be so easy as that, Jon.It was Dalla who answered him, Dalla great with child, lying on her pile of furs beside the brazier . We free folk know things you kneelers have forgotten . Sometimes the short road is not the safest, Jon Snow . The Horned Lord once said that sorcery is a sword without a hilt . There is no safe way to grasp it.There they are, Ygritte said, and Jon glanced up to see the first climber emerge above the treetops . It was Jarl . He had found a sentinel tree that leaned against the Wall, and led his men up the trunk to get a quicker start . The wood should never have been allowed to creep so close . They ’ re three hundred feet up, and they haven ’ t touched the ice itself yet.The others were still in the common room when Jon returned, alone but for Ghost . Where have you been? Pyp asked.She went.The hooded man lifted his pale moon face, and Jon slashed at it without hesitation . The sword laid the intruder open to the bone, taking off half his nose and opening a gash cheek to cheek under those eyes, eyes, eyes like blue stars burning . Jon knew that face . Othor, he thought, reeling back . Gods, he ’ s dead, he ’ s dead, I saw him dead.You know nothing, Jon Snow . Gendel did not die . He cut his way free, through the crows, and led his people back north with the wolves howling at their heels . Only Gendel did not know the caves as Gorne had, and took a wrong turn . She swept the torch back and forth, so the shadows jumped and moved . Deeper he went, and deeper, and when he tried t ’ turn back the ways that seemed familiar ended in stone rather than sky . Soon his torches began t ’ fail, one by one, till finally there was naught but dark . Gendel ’ s folk were never seen again, but on a still night you can hear their children ’ s children ’ s children sobbing under the hills, still looking for the way back up . Listen? Do you hear them?The corpse lurched forward . There was no blood . One-armed, face cut near in half, it seemed to feel nothing . Jon held the longsword before him . Stay away! he commanded, his voice gone shrill . Corn, screamed the raven, corn, corn . The severed arm was wriggling out of its torn sleeve, a pale snake with a black five-fingered head . Ghost pounced and got it between his teeth . Finger bones crunched . Jon hacked at the corpse ’ s neck, felt the steel bite deep and hard.Jon . Melisandre was so close he could feel the warmth of her breath . R ’ hllor is the only true god . A vow sworn to a tree has no more power than one sworn to your shoes . Open your heart and let the light of the Lord come in . Burn these weirwoods, and accept Winterfell as a gift of the Lord of Light.Might be we won ’ t give him one, said Chett.Wind and fire did the rest . All Jon had to do was watch . With flames below and flames above, the wildlings had nowhere to go . Some continued upward, and died . Some went downward, and died . Some stayed where they were . They died as well . Many leapt from the steps before they burned, and died from the fall . Twenty-odd Thenns were still huddled together between the fires when the ice cracked from the heat, and the whole lower third of the stair broke off, along with several tons of ice . That was the last that Jon Snow saw of Styr, the Magnar of Thenn . The Wall defends itself, he thought.If truth be told, we expected you to do just as you did . Mormont tried a plum, spit out the pit . I ordered a watch kept over you . You were seen leaving . If your brothers had not fetched you back, you would have been taken along the way, and not by friends . Unless you have a horse with wings like a raven . Do you?Aye, if you like, she said, and then, Some o ’ the Thenns are saying they heard noises out there . Shouting, they say.He told them all of it, even the part where he ’ d set Ghost at Rast ’ s throat . Maester Aemon listened silently, blind eyes fixed on the fire, but Chett ’ s face darkened with each word . Jon finished . [BOS] Without us to keep him safe, Sam will have no chance, He ’ s hopeless with a sword . My sister Arya could tear him apart, and she ’ s not yet ten . If Ser Alliser makes him fight, it ’ s only a matter of time before he ’ s hurt or killed . [EOS] So they will not love, the old man answered, for love is the bane of honor, the death of duty.Ser Jaremy shook his head . Would that I knew.That did not sound right to Jon, yet he said nothing . The maester was a hundred years old, and a high officer of the Night ’ s Watch; it was not his place to contradict him.As he lay on the ground with the darkness around,Jon knew Qhorin Halfhand the instant he saw him, though they had never met . The big ranger was half a legend in the Watch; a man of slow words and swift action, tall and straight as a spear, long-limbed and solemn . Unlike his men, he was clean-shaven . His hair fell from beneath his helm in a heavy braid touched with hoarfrost, and the blacks he wore were so faded they might have been greys . Only thumb and forefinger remained on the hand that held the reins; the other fingers had been sheared off catching a wildling ’ s axe that would otherwise have split his skull . It was told that he had thrust his maimed fist into the face of the axeman so the blood spurted into his eyes, and slew him while he was blind . Since that day, the wildlings beyond the Wall had known no foe more implacable.Yes, my lord . Jon built a cookfire, claimed a small cask of Mormont ’ s favorite robust red from stores, and poured it into a kettle . He hung the kettle above the flames while he gathered the rest of his ingredients . The Old Bear was particular about his hot spiced wine . So much cinnamon and so much nutmeg and so much honey, not a drop more . Raisins and nuts and dried berries, but no lemon, that was the rankest sort of southron heresy—which was queer, since he always took lemon in his morning beer . The drink must be hot to warm a man properly, the Lord Commander insisted, but the wine must never be allowed to come to a boil . Jon kept a careful eye on the kettle.Edd stood over the kettle swishing the eggs about with a spoon . I envy those eggs, he said . I could do with a bit of boiling about now . If the kettle were larger, I might jump in . Though I would sooner it were wine than water . There are worse ways to die than warm and drunk . I knew a brother drowned himself in wine once . It was a poor vintage, though, and his corpse did not improve it.Keep quiet, all of you, Halder said . I thought I heard something.More of us with arrows in our bellies, Grenn complained, but the custom did seem to give his brothers heart, so Jon let the names stand and the wagering continue.Swimming? In the storm? She laughed at the notion . Is this a trick t ’ get the clothes off me, Jon Snow?He pulled Longclaw over a shoulder . Aren ’ t you afraid?Jon pointed out . [BOS] It ’ s made of ice, [EOS] And would Joffrey allow it? He remembered the prince at Winterfell, the way he ’ d mocked Robb and Ser Rodrik in the yard . Jon himself he had scarcely even noticed; bastards were beneath even his contempt . My lord, will the king listen to you?His frown cracked the blood on his cheek . This is too hard, Jon thought in despair . How do I play the turncloak without becoming one? Qhorin had not told him that . But the second step is always easier than the first . The Old Bear.Do I need a trick for that now? he teased . Or is that you can ’ t swim a stroke? Jon was a strong swimmer himself, having learned the art as a boy in Winterfell ’ s great moat.They walked the rest of the way, past more cookfires and more tents, with Ghost following at their heels . Jon had never seen so many wildlings . He wondered if anyone ever had . The camp goes on forever, he reflected, but it ’ s more a hundred camps than one, and each more vulnerable than the last . Stretched out over long leagues, the wildlings had no defenses to speak of, no pits nor sharpened stakes, only small groups of outriders patrolling their perimeters . Each group or clan or village had simply stopped where they wanted, as soon as they saw others stopping or found a likely spot . The free folk . If his brothers were to catch them in such disarray, many of them would pay for that freedom with their life ’ s blood . They had numbers, but the Night ’ s Watch had discipline, and in battle discipline beats numbers nine times of every ten, his father had once told him.Yes, but—No one has . The last dragons died a hundred years ago or more . But this was before that.The sword! Matt insisted . The others took up the chant . The sword, the sword, the sword.The direwolf circled the fire, sniffing Jon, sniffing the wind, never still . It did not seem as if he were after meat right now . When the dead came walking, Ghost knew . He woke me, warned me . Alarmed, he got to his feet . Is something out there? Ghost, do you have a scent? Dywen said he smelled cold.You didn ’ t break your fast with us, and your bed hadn ’ t been slept in . Rast suggested that maybe Sam had deserted, but Jon never believed it . Desertion required its own sort of courage, and Sam had little enough of that.Jon wheeled and followed Tormund back toward the head of the column, his new cloak hanging heavy from his shoulders . It was made of unwashed sheepskins, worn fleece side in, as the wildlings suggested . It kept the snow off well enough, and at night it was good and warm, but he kept his black cloak as well, folded up beneath his saddle . [BOS] Is it true you killed a giant once? [EOS] he asked Tormund as they rode . Ghost loped silently beside them, leaving paw prints in the new-fallen snow.and a bite sharp and cold as a leech.I ’ m Jon Snow.Well . I fared well . Truly.The armorer ’ s breath was frosting as it blew from his broad, flat nose . North of the Wall was a sea of darkness that seemed to stretch forever . Jon could make out the faint red glimmer of distant fires moving through the wood . It was Mance, certain as sunrise . The Others did not light torches.Yet under the frail cage of those shattered ribs, his chest rose and fell with each shallow breath.It ’ s done, Jon thought, they ’ re breaking . The wildlings were running, throwing down their weapons, Hornfoot men and cave dwellers and Thenns in bronze scales, they were running . Mance was gone, someone was waving Harma ’ s head on a pole, Tormund ’ s lines had broken . Only the giants on their mammoths were holding, hairy islands in a red steel sea . The fires were leaping from tent to tent and some of the tall pines were going up as well . And through the smoke another wedge of armored riders came, on barded horses . Floating above them were the largest banners yet, royal standards as big as sheets; a yellow one with long pointed tongues that showed a flaming heart, and another like a sheet of beaten gold, with a black stag prancing and rippling in the wind.Find him, said Mormont . Fight him . Stop him.He knelt, jammed the torch into the ground beside him . The soil was loose, sandy . Jon pulled it out by the fistful . There were no stones, no roots . Whatever was here had been put here recently . Two feet down, his fingers touched cloth . He had been expecting a corpse, fearing a corpse, but this was something else . He pushed against the fabric and felt small, hard shapes beneath, unyielding . There was no smell, no sign of graveworms . Ghost backed off and sat on his haunches, watching.Go where? said Jon.It ’ s too heavy, the Oldtown boy complained.Are they all dead? Maester Aemon asked softly.Ser Alliser never took his eyes from Jon . As the laughter rolled around him, his face darkened, and his sword hand curled into a fist . That was a grievous error, Lord Snow, he said at last in the acid tones of an enemy.The grotto was pitch-dark by the time they finished . The only light was the dim glow of the passage back up to the larger cavern, where a score of fires burned . They were soon fumbling and bumping into each other as they tried to dress in the dark . Ygritte stumbled into the pool and screeched at the cold of the water . When Jon laughed, she pulled him in too . They wrestled and splashed in the dark, and then she was in his arms again, and it turned out they were not finished after all.The armorer laughed . Ser Wynton, gods preserve him . Last knight in the castle and all . The thing is, Stout seems to have forgotten and no one ’ s been rushing to remind him . I suppose I ’ m as much a commander as we have now . The meanest of the cripples.Every morning they had trained together, since they were big enough to walk; Snow and Stark, spinning and slashing about the wards of Winterfell, shouting and laughing, sometimes crying when there was no one else to see . They were not little boys when they fought, but knights and mighty heroes . I ’ m Prince Aemon the Dragonknight, Jon would call out, and Robb would shout back, Well, I ’ m Florian the Fool . Or Robb would say, I ’ m the Young Dragon, and Jon would reply, I ’ m Ser Ryam Redwyne.Notable achievements.Three . For a moment Jon was uncertain . There was only supposed to be two . One was asleep, though . And whether there was two or three or twenty, he still must do what he had come to do . Stonesnake touched his arm, pointed at the wildling with the horn . Jon nodded toward the one by the fire . It felt queer, picking a man to kill . Half the days of his life had been spent with sword and shield, training for this moment . Did Robb feel this way before his first battle? he wondered, but there was no time to ponder the question . Stonesnake moved as fast as his namesake, leaping down on the wildlings in a rain of pebbles . Jon slid Longclaw from its sheath and followed.Thoren Smallwood, a sinewy ranger with a weak chin and a weaker mouth hidden under a thin scraggle of beard, gave Jon and Sam a cool look . He had been one of Alliser Thorne ’ s henchmen, and had no love for either of them . The Lord Commander ’ s place is at Castle Black, lording and commanding, he told Mormont, ignoring the newcomers, it seems to me.M-m-maester Aemon m-means to p-pick them come evenfall, after the f-f-feeding.That old man? Harma ’ s tone said she did not believe it . He came himself? Then who commands at Castle Black?I warned you he was false . Varamyr ’ s tone was mild, but his shadow-cat was staring at Jon hungrily through slitted grey eyes . I never did like the smell o ’ him.The archer down below him didn ’ t.It looks snug . You know where Sam is?You could call it that . Close the door.Suddenly he realized that the table had fallen silent, and they were all looking at him . He felt the tears begin to well behind his eyes . He pushed himself to his feet.But he had not left the Wall for that; he had left because he was after all his father ’ s son, and Robb ’ s brother . The gift of a sword, even a sword as fine as Longclaw, did not make him a Mormont . Nor was he Aemon Targaryen . Three times the old man had chosen, and three times he had chosen honor, but that was him . Even now, Jon could not decide whether the maester had stayed because he was weak and craven, or because he was strong and true . Yet he understood what the old man had meant, about the pain of choosing; he understood that all too well.save our sons from war, we pray,Jon said . [BOS] I don ’ t care, I don ’ t care about them and I don ’ t care about you or Thorne or Benjen Stark or any of it . I hate it here . It ’ s too … it ’ s cold . [EOS] No, Ser Alliser said . This is another matter entirely . A bird arrived this morning from Winterfell, with a message that concerns his brother . He corrected himself . His half brother.Craster ’ s hall was dim after daylight . Inside, the night ’ s torches had burned low, and it was hard to know that the sun had risen . Lord Mormont ’ s raven was the first to spy him enter . Three lazy flaps of its great black wings, and it perched atop Longclaw ’ s hilt . Corn? It nipped at a strand of Jon ’ s hair.Fair? Dareon sneered . The girl was waiting for me, naked as the day she was born . She pulled me through the window, and you talk to me of fair? He walked off.Don ’ t be afraid, I like it in the dark . No one can see you, but you can see them . But first you have to open your eyes . See? Like this . And the tree reached down and touched him.Stannis snorted . I know Janos Slynt . And I knew Ned Stark as well . Your father was no friend of mine, but only a fool would doubt his honor or his honesty . You have his look . A big man, Stannis Baratheon towered over Jon, but he was so gaunt that he looked ten years older than he was . I know more than you might think, Jon Snow . I know it was you who found the dragonglass dagger that Randyll Tarly ’ s son used to slay the Other.And this other man, this Tormund of the many names who eluded us after the battle? Answer me truly.Jon smiled at him . [BOS] I ’ m sorry about your wrist . Robb used the same move on me once, only with a wooden blade . It hurt like seven hells, but yours must be worse . Look, if you want, I can show you how to defend that . [EOS] He was about to follow Qhorin and the others when he glimpsed a flash of white between two boulders . A patch of old snow, he thought, until he saw it stir . He was off his horse at once . As he went to his knees, Ghost lifted his head . His neck glistened wetly, but he made no sound when Jon peeled off a glove and touched him . The talons had torn a bloody path through fur and flesh, but the bird had not been able to snap his neck.Half the wildling host had lived all their lives without so much as a glimpse of the Wall, Jon judged, and most of those spoke no word of the Common Tongue . It did not matter . Mance Rayder spoke the Old Tongue, even sang in it, fingering his lute and filling the night with strange wild music.A slower death than elsewise.Jon wondered if Joffrey would keep his father as the King ’ s Hand . It did not seem likely . That might mean Lord Eddard would return to Winterfell, and his sisters as well . He might even be allowed to visit them, with Lord Mormont ’ s permission . It would be good to see Arya ’ s grin again and to talk with his father . I will ask him about my mother, he resolved . I am a man now, it is past time he told me . Even if she was a whore, I don ’ t care, I want to know . [BOS] They were as close as brothers, once . [EOS] Jon Snow winced . Halder had been born in a quarry and apprenticed as a stonemason . He was sixteen, tall and muscular, and his blows were as hard as any Jon had ever felt . [BOS] This will be uglier than a whore ’ s ass, [EOS] Pyp muttered, and it was.Sam gave a tremulous nod, working up his courage with a visible effort . Slowly he swiveled his head . His eyes widened, but Jon held his arm so he could not turn away.Oooooooh, I am the LAST of the giants,He wondered what Lord Eddard might have done if the deserter had been his brother Benjen instead of that ragged stranger . Would it have been any different? It must, surely, surely … and Robb would welcome him, for a certainty . He had to, or else …Not the battle, though? We won the battle.Jon sheathed the dagger . [BOS] I ’ ll do it . [EOS] He wanted to hear what they were saying.The Old Bear shrugged . A boy king … I imagine he ’ ll listen to his mother . A pity the dwarf isn ’ t with them . He ’ s the lad ’ s uncle, and he saw our need when he visited us . It was a bad thing, your lady mother taking him captive—Jon peeled off his moleskin glove and showed him . Scars covered his arm halfway to the elbow, and the mottled pink flesh still felt tight and tender, but it was healing . [BOS] Better . It itches, though . Maester Aemon says that ’ s good . He gave me a salve to take with me when we ride . [EOS] Jon, please . You must not do this.Perhaps Jon had ridden with the free folk too long; he could not help but laugh . Your Grace, he said, captive or no, if you think you can just give Val to me, I fear you have a deal to learn about wildling women . Whoever weds her had best be prepared to climb in her tower window and carry her off at swordpoint . . .Jon looked down dully . It was true . His wound had opened again . [BOS] An arrow wound . . . [EOS] I ’ m sorry, Jon . Pyp squeezed his shoulder . We are all.Jon had come to that same realization . [BOS] As you say, Your Grace . [EOS] He wondered where this king, was going.The Lord Commander is not accustomed to waiting, was Ser Alliser ’ s reply . And I am not accustomed to having my commands questioned by bastards.But when they reached the ringfort, Ghost balked again . He padded forward warily to sniff at the gap in the stones, and then retreated, as if he did not like what he ’ d smelled . Jon tried to grab him by the scruff of his neck and haul him bodily inside the ring, no easy task; the wolf weighed as much as he did, and was stronger by far . Ghost, what ’ s wrong with you? It was not like him to be so unsettled . In the end Jon had to give it up . As you will, he told the wolf . Go, hunt . The red eyes watched him as he made his way back through the mossy stones.The King-beyond-the-Wall smiled at that . Some thought so . Still . . . a boy from Castle Black with rangers from the Shadow Tower? How did that come to be?See that you never forget it . The hard truths are the ones to hold tight . Fetch me my plate . Is it ham again? So be it . You look weary . Was your moonlight ride so tiring?Will you take me? Just so far as the Wall—Jon smiled.He hung his mail and plate inside the armory, returned to his own cell, discarded his sweat-stained clothes, and donned a fresh set of blacks . It would be cold and windy in the cage, he knew, and colder and windier still on top of the ice, so he chose a heavy hooded cloak . Last of all he collected Longclaw, and slung the bastard sword across his back.Across the field one column had washed over Harma Dogshead . Another smashed into the flank of Tormund ’ s spearmen as he and his sons desperately tried to turn them . The giants were climbing onto their mammoths, though, and the knights on their barded horses did not like that at all; he could see how the coursers and destriers screamed and scattered at the sight of those lumbering mountains . But there was fear on the wildling side as well, hundreds of women and children rushing away from the battle, some of them blundering right under the hooves of garrons . He saw an old woman ’ s dog cart veer into the path of three chariots, to send them crashing into each other.Yes . I think so.I don ’ t see your wolf, Lannister said as they walked.Qhorin, Squire Dalbridge called softly . There . Look.A length of frayed rope bound the bundle together . Jon unsheathed his dagger and cut it, groped for the edges of the cloth, and pulled . The bundle turned, and its contents spilled out onto the ground, glittering dark and bright . He saw a dozen knives, leaf-shaped spearheads, numerous arrowheads . Jon picked up a dagger blade, featherlight and shiny black, hiltless . Torchlight ran along its edge, a thin orange line that spoke of razor sharpness . Dragonglass . What the maesters call obsidian . Had Ghost uncovered some ancient cache of the children of the forest, buried here for thousands of years? The Fist of the First Men was an old place, only . . .Do it, Jon Snow, Ygritte urged . You must . T ’ prove you are no crow, but one o ’ the free folk.The same things I ’ d have of all of them, lad . Men, horses, swords, armor, grain, cheese, wine, wool, nails . . . the Night ’ s Watch is not proud, we take what is offered . His fingers drummed against the rough-hewn planks of the table . If the winds have been kind, Ser Alliser should reach King ’ s Landing by the turn of the moon, but whether this boy Joffrey will pay him any heed, I do not know . House Lannister has never been a friend to the Watch.The pointy end . Jon had told his little sister something like that once, he remembered.It ’ s you who are forgetting, King Stannis replied.I know . Jon had dragged himself to the common hall to sup with his friends, and the failure of the rangers ’ search had been all the men had been talking of.He was more interested in the pair that came behind him: the queen ’ s brothers, the Lannisters of Casterly Rock . The Lion and the Imp; there was no mistaking which was which . Ser Jaime Lannister was twin to Queen Cersei; tall and golden, with flashing green eyes and a smile that cut like a knife . He wore crimson silk, high black boots, a black satin cloak . On the breast of his tunic, the lion of his House was embroidered in gold thread, roaring its defiance . They called him the Lion of Lannister to his face and whispered Kingslayer behind his back.And you tell me what you want me to know, and that ’ s less, Jon thought resentfully . His brother Robb had called the banners and ridden south to war, yet no word of that had been breathed to him … save by Samwell Tarly, who ’ d read the letter to Maester Aemon and whispered its contents to Jon that night in secret, all the time saying how he shouldn ’ t . Doubtless they thought his brother ’ s war was none of his concern . It troubled him more than he could say . Robb was marching and he was not . No matter how often Jon told himself that his place was here now, with his new brothers on the Wall, he still felt craven.If we are taken, you must yield.Both the white-bearded man and the bald one were warriors, that was plain to Jon at a glance . These two are more dangerous than Rattleshirt by far . He wondered which was Mance Rayder.They can ’ t. The raven pecked at the kernels in the Old Bear ’ s palm . Two hundred men or ten thousand, the country is too vast . The corn gone, Mormont turned his hand over.Melisandre was waiting for him at the base of the Wall . She had sent her queen ’ s men away . Jon asked her as they entered the cage . [BOS] What does His Grace want of me? [EOS] A striding huntsman had been worked in scarlet thread upon the breast of the fat boy ’ s fur-trimmed surcoat . Jon did not recognize the sigil . Ser Alliser Thorne looked over his new charge and said, It would seem they have run short of poachers and thieves down south . Now they send us pigs to man the Wall . Is fur and velvet your notion of armor, my Lord of Ham?Why do you hesitate? Styr said . Kill him, and be done.Hundreds and thousands . More than you ever saw, crow . She smiled . Her teeth were crooked, but very white.Chett gave a nasty laugh . I ’ ve seen what happens to soft lordlings when they ’ re put to work . Set them to churning butter and their hands blister and bleed . Give them an axe to split logs, and they cut off their own foot.Jon ’ s breath misted the air . If I lie to him, he ’ ll know . He looked Mance Rayder in the eyes, opened and closed his burned hand . [BOS] I wear the cloak you gave me, Your Grace . [EOS] Lord Snow, he likes to call himself . Ser Alliser was a spare, slim man, compact and sinewy, and just now his flinty eyes were dark with amusement.Have you been here all night?The black wool cloak of a Sworn Brother of the Night ’ s Watch, said the King-beyond-the-Wall . One day on a ranging we brought down a fine big elk . We were skinning it when the smell of blood drew a shadow-cat out of its lair . I drove it off, but not before it shredded my cloak to ribbons . Do you see? Here, here, and here? He chuckled . It shredded my arm and back as well, and I bled worse than the elk . My brothers feared I might die before they got me back to Maester Mullin at the Shadow Tower, so they carried me to a wildling village where we knew an old wisewoman did some healing . She was dead, as it happened, but her daughter saw to me . Cleaned my wounds, sewed me up, and fed me porridge and potions until I was strong enough to ride again . And she sewed up the rents in my cloak as well, with some scarlet silk from Asshai that her grandmother had pulled from the wreck of a cog washed up on the Frozen Shore . It was the greatest treasure she had, and her gift to me . He swept the cloak back over his shoulders . But at the Shadow Tower, I was given a new wool cloak from stores, black and black, and trimmed with black, to go with my black breeches and black boots, my black doublet and black mail . The new cloak had no frays nor rips nor tears . . . and most of all, no red . The men of the Night ’ s Watch dressed in black, Ser Denys Mallister reminded me sternly, as if I had forgotten . My old cloak was fit for burning now, he said.Well, said Sam, yes, but . . . I ’ m not as frightened as I was, truly . The first night, every time I heard someone getting up to make water, I thought it was wildlings creeping in to slit my throat . I was afraid that if I closed my eyes, I might never open them again, only . . . well . . . dawn came after all . He managed a wan smile . I may be craven, but I ’ m not stupid . I ’ m sore and my back aches from riding and from sleeping on the ground, but I ’ m hardly scared at all . Look . He held out a hand for Jon to see how steady it was . I ’ ve been working on my maps.I don ’ t know, Halder admitted . A sound, I thought it might have been a horse but …Then go sleep now.No, you especially, said Mance.So there is magic beyond the Wall after all . He found himself thinking of his sisters, perhaps because he ’ d dreamed of them last night . Sansa would call this an enchantment, and tears would fill her eyes at the wonder of it, but Arya would run out laughing and shouting, wanting to touch it all.Don ’ t beg me anything . Go back to your hall, you shouldn ’ t be here . We were commanded not to speak to Craster ’ s women.A nightmare this might be, yet it was no dream.For wildling raiders, he thought . Like us . Like me.Here at least they found defenders; two guards at the flap of the tent, leaning on tall spears with round leather shields strapped to their arms . When they caught sight of Ghost, one of them lowered his spearpoint and said, That beast stays here.A low rumbling growl echoed off the rock . Shadowcat, Jon knew at once . As he rose he heard another, closer at hand . He pulled his sword and turned, listening.Can he plow a field? the maester asked . Can he drive a wagon or sail a ship? Could he butcher a cow?The yard had grown deathly quiet . Jon could feel Ser Alliser ’ s eyes . Why are you waiting? he asked Rast and the others in a voice gone deceptively soft, but it was Jon who moved first . Halder barely got his sword up in time.Jon dismounted . Slung across his back in a black leather shoulder sheath was Longclaw, the hand-and-a-half bastard blade the Old Bear had given him for saving his life . A bastard sword for a bastard, the men joked . The hilt had been fashioned new for him, adorned with a wolf ’ s-head pommel in pale stone, but the blade itself was Valyrian steel, old and light and deadly sharp.The forester sucked on his spoon a moment . He had taken out his teeth . His face was leathery and wrinkled, his hands gnarled as old roots . Seems to me like it smells . . . well . . . cold.The Wall loomed before them, glimmering palely in the light of the half moon . In the sky above, the stars burned clear and sharp . Are they going to make me go up there? Sam asked . His face curdled like old milk as he looked at the great wooden stairs . I ’ ll die if I have to climb that.And suddenly he was back in the mountains, his paws sunk deep in a drift of snow as he stood upon the edge of a great precipice . Before him the Skirling Pass opened up into airy emptiness, and a long vee-shaped valley lay spread beneath him like a quilt, awash in all the colors of an autumn afternoon.Jon could not remember the last time he had slept . When he closed his eyes he dreamed of fighting; when he woke he fought . Even in the King ’ s Tower he could hear the ceaseless thunk of bronze and flint and stolen steel biting into wood, and it was louder when he tried to rest in the warming shed atop the Wall . Mance had sledgehammers at work as well, and long saws with teeth of bone and flint . Once, as he was drifting off into an exhausted sleep, there came a great cracking from the haunted forest, and a sentinel tree came crashing down in a cloud of dirt and needles.Your raiders drove them off.As if in answer, Ghost struggled to his feet.And suddenly the corpse ’ s weight was gone, its fingers ripped from his throat . It was all Jon could do to roll over, retching and shaking . Ghost had it again . He watched as the direwolf buried his teeth in the wight ’ s gut and began to rip and tear . He watched, only half conscious, for a long moment before he finally remembered to look for his sword …It was true . Jon told the maester . [BOS] You give the order, then, You have been on the Wall your whole life, the men will follow you . We have to close the gate . [EOS] Your leg ’ s healed, is it? Noye snorted . You won ’ t mind me giving it a little kick, then?He walked past the Thenns, sitting atop their rounded bronze helms about their cookfires . Where did Ygrette get herself to? He found her gear and his together, but no sign of the girl herself . She took a torch and went off that way, Grigg the Goat told him, pointing toward the back of the cavern.Lord Snow, said Cotter Pyke, if you muck this up, I ’ m going to rip your liver out and eat it raw with onions.Frightened away by something, no doubt, Dywen said.Well, his raven squawked . Well.And what if they do? I ’ d sooner be stolen by a strong man than be given t ’ some weakling by my father.Lady Stark was watching . She had not raised a cry . Jon took that for acceptance . Outside the window, the direwolf howled again . The wolf that Bran had not had time to name.In the black hour before dawn, they stopped to let the horses drink and fed them each a handful of oats and a twist or two of hay . We are not far from the place the wildlings died, said Qhorin . From there, one man could hold a hundred . The right man . He looked at Squire Dalbridge.He ’ d meant to sound encouraging, but it was the wrong thing to say . The last thing Sam needed was to be reminded of what faced them on the morrow . He shuffled the scrolls about aimlessly . There ’ s more maps . If I had time to search . . . everything ’ s a jumble . I could set it all to order, though; I know I could, but it would take time . . . well, years, in truth.Some woman . Most of them are . Someone had said that to him once . He did not remember who.They are still his brothers, declared Styr.You heard me . I mean to find Ben Stark, alive or dead . He chewed and swallowed . I will not sit here meekly and wait for the snows and the ice winds . We must know what is happening . This time the Night ’ s Watch will ride in force, against the King-beyond-the-Wall, the Others, and anything else that may be out there . I mean to command them myself . He pointed his dagger at Jon ’ s chest . By custom, the Lord Commander ’ s steward is his squire as well … but I do not care to wake every dawn wondering if you ’ ve run off again . So I will have an answer from you, Lord Snow, and I will have it now . Are you a brother of the Night ’ s Watch … or only a bastard boy who wants to play at war?Qhorin was seated cross-legged on the floor, his spine as straight as a spear . Candlelight flickered against the hard flat planes of his cheeks as he spoke . . . . Rattleshirt, the Weeping Man, and every other chief great and small, he was saying . They have wargs as well, and mammoths, and more strength than we would have dreamed . Or so he claimed . I will not swear as to the truth of it . Ebben believes the man was telling us tales to make his life last a little longer.Maester Aemon answered, from the far end of the hall . Your name has been put forth as Lord Commander, Jon.Jon asked . [BOS] So how did you come by your other names? Mance called you the Horn-Blower, didn ’ t he? Mead-king of Ruddy Hall, Husband to Bears, Father to Hosts? [EOS] It was the horn blowing he particularly wanted to hear about, but he dared not ask too plainly . And Joramun blew the Horn of Winter, and woke giants from the earth . Is that where they had come from, them and their mammoths? Had Mance Rayder found the Horn of Joramun, and given it to Tormund Thunderfist to blow?When he had read that, Jon had dispatched Zei to Mole ’ s Town on their best horse to plead with the villagers to help man the Wall . She never returned . When he sent Mully after her, he came back to report the whole village deserted, even the brothel . Most likely Zei had followed them, straight down the kingsroad . Maybe we should all do the same, Jon reflected glumly.And what did he say to you?Do it again? Ygritte blurted . With your mouth? The lord ’ s kiss? And I . . . I could see if you liked it any.Defending the Wall against your wildling friends.Not everyone, said Halder . It ’ s the builders for me . What use would rangers be if the Wall fell down?We know, said Pyp . The sentries on the Wall have been told to keep one eye on the south, and Donal Noye dispatched some men to Weatherback Ridge to watch the kingsroad . Maester Aemon ’ s sent birds to Eastwatch and the Shadow Tower too.The wide world is full of people wanting help, Jon . Would that some could find the courage to help themselves . Craster sprawls in his loft even now, stinking of wine and lost to sense . On his board below lies a sharp new axe . Were it me, I ’ d name it Answered Prayer ’ and make an end.Beside the brazier, a short but immensely broad man sat on a stool, eating a hen off a skewer . Hot grease was running down his chin and into his snow-white beard, but he smiled happily all the same . Thick gold bands graven with runes bound his massive arms, and he wore a heavy shirt of black ringmail that could only have come from a dead ranger . A few feet away, a taller, leaner man in a leather shirt sewn with bronze scales stood frowning over a map, a two-handed greatsword slung across his back in a leather sheath . He was straight as a spear, all long wiry muscle, clean-shaved, bald, with a strong straight nose and deepset grey eyes . He might even have been comely if he ’ d had ears, but he had lost both along the way, whether to frostbite or some enemy ’ s knife Jon could not tell . Their lack made the man ’ s head seem narrow and pointed.Ygritte trotted beside Jon as he slowed his garron to a walk . She claimed to be three years older than him, though she stood half a foot shorter; however old she might be, the girl was a tough little thing . Stonesnake had called her a spearwife when they ’ d captured her in the Skirling Pass . She wasn ’ t wed and her weapon of choice was a short curved bow of horn and weirwood, but spearwife fit her all the same . She reminded him a little of his sister Arya, though Arya was younger and probably skinnier . It was hard to tell how plump or thin Ygritte might be, with all the furs and skins she wore.A giantess? Longspear Ryk laughed.His first groggy thought was that somehow the Wall had fallen whilst he slept, that Mance Rayder had sent more giants or another turtle and broken through the gate . But when he rubbed his eyes he saw that the strangers were all in black . They ’ re men of the Night ’ s Watch, Jon realized . Come where? Who are you?They killed my father . Did you expect me to do nothing?And where do I stand? Jon did not know . To stay with Ygritte, he would need to become a wildling heart and soul . If he abandoned her to return to his duty, the Magnar might cut her heart out . And if he took her with him . . . assuming she would go, which was far from certain . . . well, he could scarcely bring her back to Castle Black to live among the brothers . A deserter and a wildling could expect no welcome anywhere in the Seven Kingdoms . We could go look for Gendel ’ s children, I suppose . Though they ’ d be more like to eat us than to take us in.The Old Bear seemed pleased by that . I suppose they do . You ’ ll want to wear that over the shoulder, I imagine . It ’ s too long for the hip, at least until you ’ ve put on a few inches . And you ’ ll need to work at your two-handed strikes as well . Ser Endrew can show you some moves, when your burns have healed.Oh, yes . Sam ’ s hand swept over the table, fingers plump as sausages indicating the clutter of books and scrolls before him . A dozen, at the least . He unfolded a square of parchment . The paint has faded, but you can see where the mapmaker marked the sites of wildling villages, and there ’ s another book . . . where is it now? I was reading it a moment ago . He shoved some scrolls aside to reveal a dusty volume bound in rotted leather . This, he said reverently, is the account of a journey from the Shadow Tower all the way to Lorn Point on the Frozen Shore, written by a ranger named Redwyn . It ’ s not dated, but he mentions a Dorren Stark as King in the North, so it must be from before the Conquest . Jon, they fought giants! Redwyn even traded with the children of the forest, it ’ s all here . Ever so delicately, he turned pages with a finger . He drew maps as well, see . . .Jon said . [BOS] He ’ s not like the others, He never makes a sound . That ’ s why I named him Ghost . That, and because he ’ s white . The others are all dark, grey or black . [EOS] He missed his true brothers: little Rickon, bright eyes shining as he begged for a sweet; Robb, his rival and best friend and constant companion; Bran, stubborn and curious, always wanting to follow and join in whatever Jon and Robb were doing . He missed the girls too, even Sansa, who never called him anything but my half brother since she was old enough to understand what bastard meant . And Arya … he missed her even more than Robb, skinny little thing that she was, all scraped knees and tangled hair and torn clothes, so fierce and willful . Arya never seemed to fit, no more than he had … yet she could always make Jon smile . He would give anything to be with her now, to muss up her hair once more and watch her make a face, to hear her finish a sentence with him.You do, Aemon said firmly . This will hurt.If you refuse, Mance Rayder said, Tormund Giantsbane will sound the Horn of Winter three days hence, at dawn.Let him die, insisted the Lord of Bones . The black crow is a tricksy bird . I trust him not.The dead men were carried to one of the storerooms along the base of the Wall, a dark cold cell chiseled from the ice and used to keep meat and grain and sometimes even beer . Jon saw that Mormont ’ s horse was fed and watered and groomed before he took care of his own . Afterward he sought out his friends . Grenn and Toad were on watch, but he found Pyp in the common hall . What ’ s happened? he asked.Jon told him . [BOS] Pray, then, Pray to your new gods, and I ’ ll pray to my old ones . [EOS] It all turned here.Arya ’ s eyes went wide . Dark eyes, like his . A sword, she said in a small, hushed breath.He reached the landing and stood for a long moment, afraid . Ghost nuzzled at his hand . He took courage from that . He straightened, and entered the room.Jon? He looked up . Samwell Tarly stood rocking nervously on his heels . His cheeks were red, and he was wrapped in a heavy fur cloak that made him look ready for hibernation.Jon barked . [BOS] Fire, Grenn, Pyp . [EOS] He would make me Lord of Winterfell . The wind was gusting, and Jon felt so light-headed he was half afraid it would blow him off the Wall . Your Grace, he said, you forget . I am a Snow, not a Stark.No, but I . . . What can I say that he will believe? I am still too young to wed.Jarl was with the Magnar; Mance had given them the joint command . Styr was none too pleased by that, Jon had noted early on . Mance Rayder had called the dark youth a pet of Val, who was sister to Dalla, his own queen, which made Jarl a sort of good brother once removed to the King-beyond-the-Wall . The Magnar plainly resented sharing his authority . He had brought a hundred Thenns, five times as many men as Jarl, and often acted as if he had the sole command . But it would be the younger man who got them over the ice, Jon knew . Though he could not have been older than twenty, Jarl had been raiding for eight years, and had gone over the Wall a dozen times with the likes of Alfyn Crowkiller and the Weeper, and more recently with his own band.It is if you ’ re asked.Lord Snow? he heard . Soft and meek . He turned.Jon shrugged . [BOS] There ’ s hot cider to drink, or mulled wine if you prefer . Some nights Dareon sings for us, if the mood is on him . He was a singer, before … well, not truly, but almost, an apprentice singer . [EOS] Part of him wanted only to flee, but he knew that if he did he might never see Bran again . He took a nervous step into the room . Please, he said.The way up was steep and stony, the summit crowned by a chest-high wall of tumbled rocks . They had to circle some distance west before they found a gap large enough to admit the horses . This is good ground, Thoren, the Old Bear proclaimed when at last they attained the top . We could scarce hope for better . We ’ ll make our camp here to await Halfhand . The Lord Commander swung down off his saddle, dislodging the raven from his shoulder . Complaining loudly, the bird took to the air.I ’ ll go, my lord . But you are making a mistake, my lord . You are sending the wrong man, my lord . Just the sight of me is going to anger Mance . My lord would have a better chance of reaching terms if he sent—Jon laughed . [BOS] You ’ d freeze me to death . [EOS] Jon said in a sudden rush . [BOS] Take me with you when you go back to the Wall, Father will give me leave to go if you ask him, I know he will . [EOS] Sam the Slayer . Jon could hardly imagine a less likely warrior than Sam Tarly . What happened to him?Doubtless you loved your father, Mormont said when Jon brought him his horn . The things we love destroy us every time, lad . Remember when I told you that?They ate food, said Jon, and they lived as we live.After that, Mormont rode in silence, brooding . Jon followed close behind him; as the Lord Commander ’ s steward, that was his place . The day was grey, damp, overcast, the sort of day that made you wish for rain . No wind stirred the wood; the air hung humid and heavy, and Jon ’ s clothes clung to his skin . It was warm . Too warm . The Wall was weeping copiously, had been weeping for days, and sometimes Jon even imagined it was shrinking.Jon looked up happily as his uncle Ben put a hand on his head and ruffled his hair much as Jon had ruffled the wolf ’ s . Yes, he said . His name is Ghost.Jon asked . [BOS] For what? [EOS] For this night …, Halder trotted in from the left.Sam looked mournfully back over one shoulder . No I won ’ t, he said, blinking back tears . I never do better.Jon watched her, wary . She was not even looking at him . She was talking to him, but for a part of her, it was as though he were not even in the room.That was so absurd Jon had to smile . By who? he said, looking for his friends . This had to be one of Pyp ’ s japes, surely . But Pyp shrugged at him, and Grenn shook his head . It was Dolorous Edd Tollett who stood . By me . Aye, it ’ s a terrible cruel thing to do to a friend, but better you than me.By wing? We have no trained ravens . No, I knew your face . I ’ ve seen it before . Twice.When they emerged from under the trees, Mormont spurred his tough little garron to a trot . Ghost came streaking out from the woods to meet them, licking his chops, his muzzle red from prey . High above, the men on the Wall saw the column approaching . Jon heard the deep, throaty call of the watchman ’ s great horn, calling out across the miles; a single long blast that shuddered through the trees and echoed off the ice.Mance donned his helm with its raven wings . His men were mounted up as well . Arrowhead, Mance snapped, to me, form wedge . Yet when he slammed his heels into the mare and flew across the field at the rangers, the men who raced to catch him lost all semblance of formation.Maybe they should . Have you ever seen the septa ’ s legs?It must have been buried for a reason.He looked at the words, but they didn ’ t matter . Nothing mattered . Bran was going to live . My brother is going to live, he told Mormont . The Lord Commander shook his head, gathered up a fistful of corn, and whistled . The raven flew to his shoulder, crying, Live! Live!Be troubled, said Jon, and keep my vows.Sam, he admitted . He was not at table tonight.Very well . Jon, see to my horse, and tell Ser Jaremy to put the dead men in a storeroom until the maester is ready for them . Mormont strode away grumbling.It will be good to feel warm again, if only for a little while, he told himself while he hacked bare branches from the trunk of a dead tree . Ghost sat on his haunches watching, silent as ever . Will he howl for me when I ’ m dead, as Bran ’ s wolf howled when he fell? Jon wondered . Will Shaggydog howl, far off in Winterfell, and Grey Wind and Nymeria, wherever they might be?Jon raked them with an accusing look . [BOS] You knew . [EOS] Jon told him . The boy who had his arm jerked upward on him, hard . Pain lanced through him, but Jon would not cry out . [BOS] You looked bad before I ever met you, [EOS] … don ’ t … tell … Sansa!The gate is lost . Donal Noye had closed and chained it, but it was there for the taking, the iron bars glimmering red with reflected firelight, the cold black tunnel behind . No one had fallen back to defend it; the only safety was on top of the Wall, seven hundred feet up the crooked wooden stairs.The woods fell silent . You knelt as boys, Bowen Marsh intoned solemnly . Rise now as men of the Night ’ s Watch.You wouldn ’ t see a herd of aurochs until they trampled you into the snow, Pyp whispered back.Do it, she urged him after a moment . Bastard . Do it . I can ’ t stay brave forever . When the blow did not fall she turned her head to look at him.Jon repeated bitterly . The armorer could talk about life . He ’ d had one . He ’ d only taken the black after he ’ d lost an arm at the siege of Storm ’ s End . Before that he ’ d smithed for Stannis Baratheon, the king ’ s brother . He ’ d seen the Seven Kingdoms from one end to the other; he ’ d feasted and wenched and fought in a hundred battles . They said it was Donal Noye who ’ d forged King Robert ’ s warhammer, the one that crushed the life from Rhaegar Targaryen on the Trident . He ’ d done all the things that Jon would never do, and then when he was old, well past thirty, he ’ d taken a glancing blow from an axe and the wound had festered until the whole arm had to come off . Only then, crippled, had Donal Noye come to the Wall, when his life was all but over . [BOS] Life, [EOS] We ’ re your brothers now, Grenn said.But not all he saw was warlike . He saw women dancing as well, and heard a baby crying, and a little boy ran in front of his garron, all bundled up in fur and breathless from play . Sheep and goats wandered freely, while oxen plodded along the riverbank in search of grass . The smell of roast mutton drifted from one cookfire, and at another he saw a boar turning on a wooden spit.My steward and squire, Jon Snow.Jon could see fear and fire in her eyes . Blood ran down her white throat from where the point of his dirk had pricked her . One thrust and it ’ s done, he told himself . He was so close he could smell onion on her breath . She is no older than I am . Something about her made him think of Arya, though they looked nothing at all alike . [BOS] Will you yield? [EOS] he asked, giving the dirk a half turn . And if she doesn ’ t?And kept my vow . That one, at least.Jon had to stoop to pass through the low door . Within he found a packed dirt floor . There were no furnishings, no sign that people had lived here but for some ashes beneath the smoke hole in the roof . [BOS] What a dismal place to live, [EOS] he said.To go, he said at once.The armorer gave the offered wrist the briefest of glances . A bruise . Perhaps a sprain . Maestor Aemon will give you a salve . Go with him, Todder, that head wants looking after . The rest of you, return to your cells . Not you, Snow . You stay.Jon climbed the steps slowly, trying not to think that this might be the last time ever . Ghost padded silently beside him . Outside, snow swirled through the castle gates, and the yard was all noise and chaos, but inside the thick stone walls it was still warm and quiet . Too quiet for Jon ’ s liking.Mance laughed . If so, our war is won . Bowen knows a deal more about counting swords than he ’ s ever known about using them.Very good . See that my horse is saddled and ready . I mean for us to ride within the hour . Have you eaten? Craster serves plain fare, but filling.My sword is pledged to the Night ’ s Watch, Your Grace, Jon Snow answered carefully.Oh . Sam did not look anxious to meet Craster, even if it meant a warm fire.Jon made himself smile . [BOS] The Frostfangs are cold . This is a brisk autumn day . [EOS] She put a hand over her belly . Wife now . Edging away from the wolf, she knelt mournfully beside the broken hutch . I was going to breed them rabbits . There ’ s no sheep left.I did not know, said Jon truthfully, trying to remember the face of the man he had slain in the pass . You told me Mance would take me.Arya seemed puzzled at first . Then it came to her . She was that quick . They said it together:Me? said Grenn . Him? said Pyp . It was hard to tell which of them was more horrified . But, Grenn stammered, b-but what do I do if the wildlings attack again?NO, Samwell Tarly squeaked.Why? Why? Why? the raven called.Lord Mormont said, Ben was searching for Ser Waymar Royce, who ’ d vanished with Gared and young Will.Now, that is the question . How many wildlings are there? How many men of fighting age? No one knows with certainty . The Frostfangs are cruel, inhospitable, a wilderness of stone and ice . They will not long sustain any great number of people . I can see only one purpose in this gathering . Mance Rayder means to strike south, into the Seven Kingdoms.Mammoths centered the wildling line, he saw, a hundred or more with giants on their backs clutching mauls and huge stone axes . More giants loped beside them, pushing along a tree trunk on great wooden wheels, its end sharpened to a point . A ram, he thought bleakly . If the gate still stood below, a few kisses from that thing would soon turn it into splinters . On either side of the giants came a wave of horsemen in boiled leather harness with fire-hardened lances, a mass of running archers, hundreds of foot with spears, slings, clubs, and leathern shields . The bone chariots from the Frozen Shore clattered forward on the flanks, bouncing over rocks and roots behind teams of huge white dogs . The fury of the wild, Jon thought as he listened to the skirl of skins, to the dogs barking and baying, the mammoths trumpeting, the free folk whistling and screaming, the giants roaring in the Old Tongue . Their drums echoed off the ice like rolling thunder.A cloak?Jon Snow, Your Grace . He wondered whether he was expected to bend the knee as well.The Halfhand said, A horn they must not blow.She told you true.Ser Alliser ’ s onyx eyes were fixed on Jon Snow . It would seem our Bastard is in love, he said as Jon helped the fat boy to his feet . Show me your steel, Lord Snow.Dywen and Hake returned last night, the Old Bear said . They found no sign of your uncle, no more than the others did.I gave you my name.Noye had put the women and children to work as well . Those too young to fight would carry water and tend the fires, the Mole ’ s Town midwife would assist Clydas and Maester Aemon with any wounded, and Three-Finger Hobb suddenly had more spit boys, kettle stirrers, and onion choppers than he knew what to do with . Two of the whores had even offered to fight, and had shown enough skill with the crossbow to be given a place on the steps forty feet up.We ’ re sorry about your father, Grenn said, but it doesn ’ t matter . Once you say the words, you can ’ t leave, no matter what.There ’ s been no one, he confessed . Only you.One bird croaking my name was bad enough, said Jon, and snow ’ s nothing a black brother wants to hear about . Snow often meant death in the north.On a rock above them, the eagle flapped its wings and split the air with a scream of fury.Jon agreed . His voice was flat and tired . The visit had taken all the strength from him . [BOS] You Starks are hard to kill, [EOS] Robb knew something was wrong . My mother …Jon Snow laughed with him . Afterward they sat on the frozen ground, huddled in their cloaks with Ghost between them . Jon told the story of how he and Robb had found the pups newborn in the late summer snows . It seemed a thousand years ago now . Before long he found himself talking of Winterfell.A part, he tried to remind himself afterward . I am playing a part . I had to do it once, to prove I ’ d abandoned my vows . I had to make her trust me . It need never happen again . He was still a man of the Night ’ s Watch, and a son of Eddard Stark . He had done what needed to be done, proved what needed to be proven.We ’ ll hear no scolds from you, bastard . Chett blamed Jon for the loss of his comfortable position with Maester Aemon, and not without justice . If he had not gone to Aemon about Sam Tarly, Chett would still be tending an old blind man instead of a pack of ill-tempered hunting hounds . You may be the Lord Commander ’ s pet, but you ’ re not the Lord Commander . . . and you wouldn ’ t talk so bloody bold without that monster of yours always about.Jon said . [BOS] Tip it over and roll it, Careful, if it rolls over your foot you ’ ll end up like Spare Boot . [EOS] It was not time for his bandages to be changed . Jon frowned suspiciously . Why? he demanded . Sam looked miserable . That was answer enough . You told him, didn ’ t you? Jon said angrily . You told him that you told me.He did not understand . What do you mean?It was the black of night outside, bitter cold and overcast . His brothers were spilling out of towers and keeps, buckling their swordbelts and walking toward the Wall . Jon looked for Pyp and Grenn, but could not find them . Perhaps one of them was the sentry blowing the horn . It is Mance, he thought . He has come at last . That was good . We will fight a battle, and then we ’ ll rest . Alive or dead, we ’ ll rest.A long silence . Then: Yes . And Yes, the raven muttered, strutting . Yes, yes, yes.Jon told her . [BOS] So are you, I had Mikken make this special . The bravos use swords like this in Pentos and Myr and the other Free Cities . It won ’ t hack a man ’ s head off, but it can poke him full of holes if you ’ re fast enough . [EOS] Mance nodded, and walked away, Harma and Sixskins beside him . Varamyr ’ s wolves and shadowcat followed behind . Jon and Ygritte were left with Jarl, Rattleshirt, and the Magnar . The two older wildlings looked at Jon with ill-concealed rancor as Jarl said, You heard, we ride at daybreak . Bring all the food you can, there ’ ll be no time to hunt . And have your face seen to, crow . You look a bloody mess.He is a warg, said the Lord of Bones, and a crow . I like him not.Jon nodded, and turned back to the king . [BOS] Your Grace, you spoke of Val . She has asked to see Mance Rayder, to bring his son to him . It would be a . . . a kindness . [EOS] Yes, my lord . Sam is teaching them to talk.Jon pushed forward . [BOS] Sam Tarly can . Sam loves maps . [EOS] I know you held the gate here, King Stannis said . If not, I would have come too late.No one needed to ask what it was . Nor did Jon need the maester ’ s Myrish eye to see it creeping out from amongst the tents and trees . It doesn ’ t really look much like a turtle, Satin commented . Turtles don ’ t have fur.. . . horn.Jon confessed . [BOS] Yes, my lord, I would sooner not tell you which . She was frightened and wanted help . [EOS] With Mance Rayder ’ s head, aye . Grenn was trying to sound cheerful, Jon could tell . Sam the Slayer!Jon asked, smiling . [BOS] What could you do if you did find her? You said she bit your member off . [EOS] Garth of Oldtown, Ollo Lophand, Dirk . . . thieves, cowards and killers, the lot of them . We should have seen it coming . The Watch is not what it was . Too few honest men to keep the rogues in line . Donal Noye turned the maester ’ s blades in the fire . A dozen true men made it back . Dolorous Edd, Giant, your friend the Aurochs . We had the tale from them.Smiling, he left them to it and rode down in the cage.Aye, and wiser . You know nothing, Jon Snow . She pushed away from him, and shrugged out of her rabbitskin vest.I hope I never see the Frostfangs then . I knew a girl in Oldtown who liked to ice her wine . That ’ s the best place for ice, I think . In wine . Satin glanced south, frowned . You think the scarecrow sentinels scared them off, my lord?If she was so good, she should have torn that Wall down.Fishing, I ’ d call it, in this wet, Dywen said.Jon told the King-beyond-the-Wall, [BOS] Believe what you will, but I knew nothing of any attack . [EOS] You were to kill them all.There were wildlings at Whitetree only a year ago . Thoren Smallwood looked more a lord than Mormont did, clad in Ser Jaremy Rykker ’ s gleaming black mail and embossed breastplate . His heavy cloak was richly trimmed with sable, and clasped with the crossed hammers of the Rykkers, wrought in silver . Ser Jaremy ’ s cloak, once . . . but the wight had claimed Ser Jaremy, and the Night ’ s Watch wasted nothing.Are you certain they never cut your member off? Tormund gave a shrug, as if to say he would never understand such madness . Well, you are a free man now, but if you will not have the girl, best find yourself a she-bear . If a man does not use his member it grows smaller and smaller, until one day he wants to piss and cannot find it.He is no craven . One of the archers pulled off her sewn sheepskin helm and shook out a head of shaggy red hair . This is the Bastard o ’ Winterfell, who spared me . Let him live.Sit, Ghost, Jon commanded . That ’ s it . Keep still . He looked up at the dwarf . You can touch him now . He won ’ t move until I tell him to . I ’ ve been training him.Die, the raven muttered, pacing along Mormont ’ s shoulders . Die, die, die, die . The Old Bear sat slumped and silent, as if the burden of speech had grown too heavy for him to bear . But at last he said, May the gods forgive me . Choose your men.Good Queen Alysanne, they called her later . One of the castles on the Wall was named for her as well . Queensgate . Before her visit they called it Snowgate.Well? Janos Slynt demanded of Jon harshly . Do you deny it? Or will you claim Qhorin commanded you to kill him?So he was . Some say Prince Aemon was King Daeron ’ s true father, not Aegon the Unworthy . Be that as it may, our Aemon lacked the Dragonknight ’ s martial nature . He likes to say he had a slow sword but quick wits . Small wonder his grandfather packed him off to the Citadel . He was nine or ten, I believe . . . and ninth or tenth in the line of succession as well.A wind swirled against the Wall, tugging at his cloak . He could feel the cold coming off the ice the way heat comes off a fire . Jon pulled up his hood and began to walk again . The afternoon was growing old, and the sun was low in the west . A hundred yards away was the camp where King Stannis had confined his wildling captives within a ring of ditches, sharpened stakes, and high wooden fences . To his left were three great firepits, where the victors had burned the bodies of all the free folk to die beneath the Wall, huge pelted giants and little Hornfoot men alike . The killing ground was still a desolation of scorched weeds and hardened pitch, but Mance ’ s people had left traces of themselves everywhere; a torn hide that might have been part of a tent, a giant ’ s maul, the wheel of a chariot, a broken spear, a pile of mammoth dung . On the edge of the haunted forest, where the tents had been, Jon found an oakwood stump and sat.They ’ re not, insisted Ygritte . He never killed me, like they told him . And he slew the Halfhand, we all saw.Jon said . He took a deep breath to gather his thoughts . [BOS] That ’ s stupid, I remember once I asked Maester Luwin why he wore a chain around his throat . [EOS] Jon said . The gods of the sept had nothing to do with him; the blood of the First Men flowed in the veins of the Starks . [BOS] Yes, my lord, [EOS] Winter is coming . The Stark words had never sounded so grim or ominous to Jon as they did now . My lord, he asked hesitantly, it ’ s said there was a bird last night …Dalla died . Jon was saddened by that still . Val is her sister . She and the babe did not require much capturing, Your Grace . You had put the wildlings to flight, and the skinchanger Mance had left to guard his queen went mad when the eagle burned . Jon looked at Melisandre . Some say that was your doing.There ’ s nothing here.Mole ’ s Town was bigger than it seemed, but three quarters of it was under the ground, in deep warm cellars connected by a maze of tunnels . Even the whorehouse was down there, nothing on the surface but a wooden shack no bigger than a privy, with a red lantern hung over the door . On the Wall, he ’ d heard men call the whores buried treasures . He wondered whether any of his brothers in black were down there tonight, mining . That was oathbreaking too, yet no one seemed to care.Who ’ s this one now? Craster said before Jon could go . He has the look of a Stark.When has Stannis Baratheon ever had much good to say of anyone? Ser Alliser ’ s flinty voice was unmistakable . If we let Stannis choose our Lord Commander, we become his bannermen in all but name . Tywin Lannister is not like to forget that, and you know it will be Lord Tywin who wins in the end . He ’ s already beaten Stannis once, on the Blackwater.You know nothing, Jon Snow, Ygritte would have told him . I know that I am going to die, he thought . I know that much, at least . All men die, he could almost hear her say, and women too, and every beast that flies or swims or runs . It ’ s not the when o ’ dying that matters, it ’ s the how of it, Jon Snow . Easy for you to say, he thought back . You died brave in battle, storming the castle of a foe . I ’ m going to die a turncloak and a killer . Nor would his death be quick, unless it came on the end of Mance ’ s sword.No, she said . There ’ s nothing behind us . The look she gave him was sad . By now Mance is well down the Milkwater, marching on your Wall.Jon mounted his garron, wheeled him about, and trotted off . Beyond the shade of the great weirwood the men of the Night ’ s Watch stood beneath lesser trees, tending their horses, chewing strips of salt beef, pissing, scratching, and talking . When the command was given to move out again, the talk died, and they climbed back into their saddles . Jarman Buckwell ’ s scouts rode out first, with the vanguard under Thoren Smallwood heading the column proper . Then came the Old Bear with the main force, Ser Mallador Locke with the baggage train and packhorses, and finally Ser Ottyn Wythers and the rear guard . Two hundred men all told, with half again as many mounts.Some woman, no doubt . Most of them are . He favored Jon with a rueful grin . Remember this, boy . All dwarfs may be bastards, yet not all bastards need be dwarfs . And with that he turned and sauntered back into the feast, whistling a tune . When he opened the door, the light from within threw his shadow clear across the yard, and for just a moment Tyrion Lannister stood tall as a king.Jon said . [BOS] A bastard can have honor too, I am ready to swear your oath . [EOS] Come take him then, said Tormund, but best come with sword in hand, for that ’ s where you ’ ll find mine . Might be I ’ ll boil your bones, and use your skull to piss in . Har!Aemon Targaryen, Jon thought, a king ’ s son and a king ’ s brother and a king who might have been . But he said nothing.You can ’ t be the Lord of Winterfell, you ’ re bastard-born, he heard Robb say again . And the stone kings were growling at him with granite tongues . You do not belong here . This is not your place . When Jon closed his eyes he saw the heart tree, with its pale limbs, red leaves, and solemn face . The weirwood was the heart of Winterfell, Lord Eddard always said . . . but to save the castle Jon would have to tear that heart up by its ancient roots, and feed it to the red woman ’ s hungry fire god . I have no right, he thought . Winterfell belongs to the old gods.Jon said . [BOS] First lesson, Stick them with the pointy end . [EOS] Burn them, the girl repeated stubbornly, or it might be you ’ ll need them swords again.Qhorin clasped the squire ’ s forearm with a gloved hand . If the eagle flies down for a look at you . . .No, he answered, sullen.Already their archers were stealing forward, pushing their rolling mantlets . Here come our breakfast arrows, Pyp announced cheerfully, as he did every morning . It ’ s good that he can make a jape of it, Jon thought . Someone has to . Three days ago, one of those breakfast arrows had caught Red Alyn of the Rosewood in the leg . You could still see his body at the foot of the Wall, if you cared to lean out far enough . Jon had to think that it was better for them to smile at Pyp ’ s jest than to brood over Alyn ’ s corpse.He lay on the ground afterward, clutching his prize and bleeding quietly, too weak to move . After a while, he realized that if he did not make himself move he was like to bleed to death . Jon crawled to the shallow stream where the mare was drinking, washed his thigh in the cold water, and bound it tight with a strip of cloth torn from his cloak . He washed the arrow too, turning it in his hands . Was the fletching grey, or white? Ygritte fletched her arrows with pale grey goose feathers . Did she loose a shaft at me as I fled? Jon could not blame her for that . He wondered if she ’ d been aiming for him or the horse . If the mare had gone down, he would have been doomed . A lucky thing my leg got in the way, he muttered.Words failed him for a moment . The boy . . . the child would be a bastard.Jon made himself smile . [BOS] That would be a welcome sight to see, Owen . [EOS] Ignoring the twinge of pain in his leg, he swept a black fur cloak about his shoulders, gathered up his crutch, and went out onto the Wall to face another day.They won ’ t trouble us, Ygritte said . It ’ s the dead they ’ ve come for . Cats can smell blood six miles off . They ’ ll stay near the bodies till they ’ ve eaten every last stringy shred o ’ meat, and cracked the bones for the marrow.Jon took a step toward the tent, thinking of the Horn of Winter, but the shadowcat blocked him, tail lashing . The beast ’ s nostrils flared, and slaver ran from his curved front teeth . He smells my fear . He missed Ghost more than ever then . The two wolves were behind him, growling.Noye frowned . Scarred or smooth, it ’ s a face I thought I ’ d seen the last of . We heard you ’ d gone over to Mance Raydar.Gentle Mother, font of mercy,Dywen was holding forth, spoon in hand . I know this wood as well as any man alive, and I tell you, I wouldn ’ t care to ride through it alone tonight . Can ’ t you smell it?Jon drove him backward, attacking with every blow, keeping the older boy on the heels . Know your foe, Ser Rodrik had taught him once; Jon knew Halder, brutally strong but short of patience, with no taste for defense . Frustrate him, and he would leave himself open, as certain as sunset.I shall live and die at my post, Grenn added, nodding.Older and bigger and stronger, that ’ s the truth . I ’ ll wager your master-at-arms taught you how to fight bigger men at Winterfell, though . Who was he, some old knight?Jon told Sam what he had seen and heard in Craster ’ s Keep . [BOS] A midden heap with a roof and a firepit . [EOS] He knows the Watch and he knows the Wall, said Mance, and he knows Castle Black better than any raider ever could . You ’ ll find a use for him, or you ’ re a fool.The realm has three kings already, and that ’ s two too many for my liking . Mormont stroked the raven under the beak with a finger, but all the while his eyes never left Jon Snow.It was a long moment before he understood what was happening . When he did, he bolted to his feet . Ghost? He turned toward the wood, and there he came, padding silently out of the green dusk, the breath coming warm and white from his open jaws . Ghost! he shouted, and the direwolf broke into a run . He was leaner than he had been, but bigger as well, and the only sound he made was the soft crunch of dead leaves beneath his paws . When he reached Jon he leapt, and they wrestled amidst brown grass and long shadows as the stars came out above them . Gods, wolf, where have you been? Jon said when Ghost stopped worrying at his forearm . I thought you ’ d died on me, like Robb and Ygritte and all the rest . I ’ ve had no sense of you, not since I climbed the Wall, not even in dreams . The direwolf had no answer, but he licked Jon ’ s face with a tongue like a wet rasp, and his eyes caught the last light and shone like two great red suns.And now they had, which meant that the decision could be delayed no longer . Jon was glad of that much, at least . If they must battle Mance Rayder, let it be soon.The girl laughed scornfully . For one o ’ us . D ’ ya think you ’ re the first crow ever flew down off the Wall? In your hearts you all want to fly free.Gods be good, Dywen muttered . That ’ s a hand.The order of builders provided the masons and carpenters to repair keeps and towers, the miners to dig tunnels and crush stone for roads and footpaths, the woodsmen to clear away new growth wherever the forest pressed too close to the Wall . Once, it was said, they had quarried immense blocks of ice from frozen lakes deep in the haunted forest, dragging them south on sledges so the Wall might be raised ever higher . Those days were centuries gone, however; now, it was all they could do to ride the Wall from Eastwatch to the Shadow Tower, watching for cracks or signs of melt and making what repairs they could.She nodded, resigned . Will you burn me, after?He had not shaved since leaving the Fist of the First Men, and the hair on his lip was soon stiff with frost . Two hours into the climb, the wind kicked up so fiercely that it was all he could do to hunch down and cling to the rock, praying he would not be blown off the mountain . One step and then another, he resumed when the gale subsided . One step and then another, and I will not fall.The wind was blowing wild from the east, so strong the heavy cage would rock whenever a gust got it in its teeth . It skirled along the Wall, shivering off the ice, making Jon ’ s cloak flap against the bars . The sky was slate grey, the sun no more than a faint patch of brightness behind the clouds . Across the killing ground, he could see the glimmer of a thousand campfires burning, but their lights seemed small and powerless against such gloom and cold.If you say so . Jon was doubtful . Treasure meant gold, silver, and jewels, not dust, spiders, and rotting leather.No . Just the men who used to live here.How many? Noye half-carried Jon out the door.The Mad King? Jon was confused . Aerys had been king before Robert, that wasn ’ t so long ago.I am no lord, sire . You came because we sent for you, I hope . Though I could not say why you took so long about it.Jon ’ s anger flared . [BOS] He said my mother was— [EOS] The smell was very faint . Old dung, said Jon . The house felt as though it had been empty for some time . Kneeling, he searched through the straw with his hands to see if anything had been concealed beneath, then made a round of the walls . It did not take very long . There ’ s nothing here.Yes . Cold and hard and mean, that ’ s the Wall, and the men who walk it . Not like the stories your wet nurse told you . Well, piss on the stories and piss on your wet nurse . This is the way it is, and you ’ re here for life, same as the rest of us.I do, shouted Owen the Oaf . I hear you, Lord Snow.Jon . . . it grieves me to say, but Lord Commander Mormont was murdered at Craster ’ s Keep, at the hands of his Sworn Brothers.So Castle Black had a wall of sorts at last, a crescent-shaped barricade ten feet high made of stores; casks of nails and barrels of salt mutton, crates, bales of black broadcloth, stacked logs, sawn timbers, fire-hardened stakes, and sacks and sacks of grain . The crude rampart enclosed the two things most worth defending; the gate to the north, and the foot of the great wooden switchback stair that clawed and climbed its way up the face of the Wall like a drunken thunderbolt, supported by wooden beams as big as tree trunks driven deep into the ice.There ’ s no time . There are wildlings south of the Wall, coming up from Queenscrown to open the gate.Jon hesitated . [BOS] Rattleshirt, we called him . Treacherous and blood-thirsty . If there ’ s honor in him, he hides it down beneath his suit of bones . [EOS] Jon saw the sense of that . It would be pleasant to ride in the light for a time, to let the bright mountain sun soak through their cloaks and chase the chill from their bones, but they dared not . Where there were three watchers there might be others, waiting to sound the alarm.He won ’ t hurt you . He knew at once what had happened; a wooden hutch, its slats shattered, lay on its side in the wet grass . He must have been hungry . We haven ’ t seen much game . Jon whistled . The direwolf bolted down the rabbit, crunching the small bones between his teeth, and padded over to him.Jon had started drinking then, and he had not stopped.The Wall was often said to stand seven hundred feet high, but Jarl had found a place where it was both higher and lower . Before them, the ice rose sheer from out of the trees like some immense cliff, crowned by wind-carved battlements that loomed at least eight hundred feet high, perhaps nine hundred in spots . But that was deceptive, Jon realized as they drew closer . Brandon the Builder had laid his huge foundation blocks along the heights wherever feasible, and hereabouts the hills rose wild and rugged.He slew Qhorin Halfhand, said Longspear Ryk . Him and that wolf o ’ his.Jon ’ s eyes widened in disbelief . [BOS] That can ’ t be so . [EOS] The Others . . .Pycelle makes no mention of them, but doubtless they ’ ll be treated gently . I will ask about them when I write . Mormont shook his head . This could not have happened at a worse time . If ever the realm needed a strong king … there are dark days and cold nights ahead, I feel it in my bones … He gave Jon a long shrewd look . I hope you are not thinking of doing anything stupid, boy.Ours is a striding huntsman, Samwell Tarly said.I prayed for it, she said dully . He was my special boy . I went to the sept and prayed seven times to the seven faces of god that Ned would change his mind and leave him here with me . Sometimes prayers are answered.Jon objected . [BOS] Winterfell ’ s not in the south, [EOS] Show them, commanded Rattleshirt.You were his brother, he almost said . How could you leave him amongst wildlings and murderers?No more than you are.King Stannis gazed off north again, his gold cloak streaming from his shoulders . It may be that I am mistaken in you, Jon Snow . We both know the things that are said of bastards . You may lack your father ’ s honor, or your brother ’ s skill in arms . But you are the weapon the Lord has given me . I have found you here, as you found the cache of dragonglass beneath the Fist, and I mean to make use of you . Even Azor Ahai did not win his war alone . I killed a thousand wildlings, took another thousand captive, and scattered the rest, but we both know they will return . Melisandre has seen that in her fires . This Tormund Thunderfist is likely re-forming them even now, and planning some new assault . And the more we bleed each other, the weaker we shall all be when the real enemy falls upon us.Jon told him . [BOS] Eat, There ’ s no knowing when you ’ ll have another chance . [EOS] He took two buns himself . The nuts were pine nuts, and besides the raisins there were bits of dried apple.I am no lord, Jon Snow . Qhorin slid the stone smoothly along the steel with his two-fingered hand.Toad made a face . I hope not . I ’ m sick of looking at those ears of yours.It ’ s as heavy as it needs to be to stop a sword, Jon said . Now get it up . He stepped forward, slashing . Satin jerked the shield up in time to catch the sword on its rim, and swung his own blade at Jon ’ s ribs . Good, Jon said, when he felt the impact on his own shield . That was good . But you need to put your body into it . Get your weight behind the steel and you ’ ll do more damage than with arm strength alone . Come, try it again, drive at me, but keep the shield up or I ’ ll ring your head like a bell . . .The dead were burning when Grigg the Goat reached the top of the Wall . By the time Errok ’ s four had joined them, nothing remained of Jarl and his team but bone and ash.We shall see . In the leather chair behind the table where the Old Bear wrote his letters sat a big, broad, jowly man Jon did not know . Yes, we shall see, he said again . You will not deny that you are Jon Snow, I hope? Stark ’ s bastard?Once the horse had settled, Ghost loped along easily beside him . Jon caught up to Mormont as he was wending his way around a hawthorn thicket . Is the bird away? the Old Bear asked.Mance Rayder looked at Jon ’ s face for a long moment . I think we had best find you a new cloak, the king said, holding out his hand.Jon admitted . [BOS] Very, [EOS] The sun had begun to sink by then, so the climbers wasted little time . They unwound the long coils of hemp they ’ d had looped around their chests, tied them all together, and tossed down one end . The thought of trying to climb five hundred feet up that rope filled Jon with dread, but Mance had planned better than that . The raiders Jarl had left below uncasked a huge ladder, with rungs of woven hemp as thick as a man ’ s arm, and tied it to the climbers ’ rope . Errok and Grigg and their men grunted and heaved, pulled it up, staked it to the top, then lowered the rope again to haul up a second ladder . There were five altogether.Agreed . Mance Rayder beckoned Jon closer . If you would join us, you ’ d best know us . The man you took for me is Styr, Magnar of Thenn . Magnar means ‘ lord ’ in the Old Tongue . The earless man stared at Jon coldly as Mance turned to the white-bearded one . Our ferocious chicken-eater here is my loyal Tormund . The woman—Now why would you doubt a mighty man like me? It was winter and I was half a boy, and stupid the way boys are . I went too far and my horse died and then a storm caught me . A true storm, not no little dusting such as this . Har! I knew I ’ d freeze to death before it broke . So I found me a sleeping giant, cut open her belly, and crawled up right inside her . Kept me warm enough, she did, but the stink near did for me . The worst thing was, she woke up when the spring come and took me for her babe . Suckled me for three whole moons before I could get away . Har! There ’ s times I miss the taste o ’ giant ’ s milk, though.In Old Nan ’ s stories, giants were outsized men who lived in colossal castles, fought with huge swords, and walked about in boots a boy could hide in . These were something else, more bearlike than human, and as wooly as the mammoths they rode . Seated, it was hard to say how big they truly were . Ten feet tall maybe, or twelve, Jon thought . Maybe fourteen, but no taller . Their sloping chests might have passed for those of men, but their arms hung down too far, and their lower torsos looked half again as wide as their upper . Their legs were shorter than their arms, but very thick, and they wore no boots at all; their feet were broad splayed things, hard and horny and black . Neckless, their huge heavy heads thrust forward from between their shoulder blades, and their faces were squashed and brutal . Rats ’ eyes no larger than beads were almost lost within folds of horny flesh, but they snuffled constantly, smelling as much as they saw.True enough . Have you chosen your ravens yet, Tarly?We know where the wildlings are massing, Mormont came back . We had it from Craster . I mislike the man, but I do not think he lied to us in this.Her fear was plain on her face . You will come back, though . When your warring ’ s done, you ’ ll pass this way again.Must be cold down there, said Noye . What say we warm them up, lads? A dozen jars of lamp oil had been lined up on the precipice . Pyp ran down the line with a torch, setting them alight . Owen the Oaf followed, shoving them over the edge one by one . Tongues of pale yellow fire swirled around the jars as they plunged downward . When the last was gone, Grenn kicked loose the chocks on a barrel of pitch and sent it rumbling and rolling over the edge as well . The sounds below changed to shouts and screams, sweet music to their ears.Was that their king? asked Jon.For the nonce, until we can hold a choosing, said Maester Aemon . Clydas, bring me the flask.And Val ’ s no man, white-bearded Tormund snorted . You ought to have noticed that by now, lad.The views atop the hill were bracing, yet it was the ringwall that drew Jon ’ s eye, the weathered grey stones with their white patches of lichen, their beards of green moss . It was said that the Fist had been a ringfort of the First Men in the Dawn Age . An old place, and strong, Thoren Smallwood said.Jon turned on him in a fury . [BOS] I see Ser Alliser ’ s bloody hand, that ’ s all I see . He wanted to shame me, and he has . [EOS] Had he lost him? Dywen chuckled . See that you young bucks don ’ t go nosing about Craster ’ s wives, you hear?An arrow . One of Ygritte ’ s, I think.When he closed his eyes, he dreamed of direwolves.Jon scarcely heard him . He brushed off Tyrion ’ s hand and strode across the hall . He was running by the time he hit the doors . He raced to the Commander ’ s Keep, dashing through drifts of old snow . When the guards passed him, he took the tower steps two at a time . By the time he burst into the presence of the Lord Commander, his boots were soaked and Jon was wild-eyed and panting . Bran, he said . What does it say about Bran?The bird hates you, Jon Snow, said Ygritte . And well he might . He was a man, before you killed him.Jon said to the fat boy . Ser Alliser had often sent two foes against him, but never three . He knew he would likely go to sleep bruised and bloody tonight . He braced himself for the assault . [BOS] Stay behind me, [EOS] That first night, after a long day ahorse, they made camp in a shallow stone bowl atop a nameless mountain, huddling close to the fire while the snow began to fall . Jon watched the flakes melt as they drifted over the flames . Despite his layers of wool and fur and leather, he ’ d felt cold to the bone . Ygritte sat beside him after she had eaten, her hood pulled up and her hands tucked into her sleeves for warmth . When Mance hears how you did for Halfhand, he ’ ll take you quick enough, she told him.The raven seemed to like the notion . Wall, it screamed, spreading black wings like a high collar behind Mormont ’ s head.But now there was no more time.You call that a bed?They may not wish to . They are thousands, and we will be three hundred when the Halfhand reaches us . Ser Mallador accepted a cup from Jon.I have never seen a dragon.He could see that for himself . Inch by inch, yard by yard, the turtle crept closer, rolling, rumbling and rocking as it crossed the killing ground . Once the wildlings got it flush against the Wall, it would give them all the shelter they needed while their axes crashed through the hastily-repaired outer gates . Inside, under the ice, they would clear the loose rubble from the tunnel in a matter of hours, and then there would be nothing to stop them but two iron gates, a few half-frozen corpses, and whatever brothers Jon cared to throw in their path, to fight and die down in the dark.Together they washed the caked blood from the direwolf ’ s fur . Ghost struggled and bared his teeth when Qhorin poured the wine into the ragged red gashes the eagle had left him, but Jon wrapped his arms around him and murmured soothing words, and soon enough the wolf quieted . By the time they ’ d ripped a strip from Jon ’ s cloak to wrap the wounds, full dark had settled . Only a dusting of stars set the black of sky apart from the black of stone . Do we press on? Stonesnake wanted to know.Greyguard has largely collapsed . Stonedoor would serve better, if the men could be found . Icemark and Deep Lake as well, mayhaps . With daily patrols along the battlements between.Slynt purpled . Murder? You insolent pup . King Robert was not even cold when Lord Eddard moved against his son . He rose to his feet; a shorter man than Mormont, but thick about the chest and arms, with a gut to match . A small gold spear tipped with red enamel pinned his cloak at the shoulder . Your father died by the sword, but he was highborn, a King ’ s Hand . For you, a noose will serve . Ser Alliser, take this turncloak to an ice cell.Craster wiped his drooping mouth with the back of a hairy hand . I ’ ll taste your wine, Lord Crow, that I will . One more thing . Any man lays a hand on my wives, he loses the hand.The king ’ s men cleared the door when they told them of the choosing, and Three-Finger Hobb and half a dozen helpers went trotting off to the kitchen to fetch the food . Jon did not wait to eat . He walked across the castle, wondering if he were dreaming, with the raven on his shoulder and Ghost at his heels . Pyp, Grenn, and Sam trailed after him, chattering, but he hardly heard a word until Grenn whispered, Sam did it, and Pyp said, Sam did it! Pyp had brought a wineskin with him, and he took a long drink and chanted, Sam, Sam, Sam the wizard, Sam the wonder, Sam Sam the marvel man, he did it . But when did you hide the raven in the kettle, Sam, and how in seven hells could you be certain it would fly to Jon? It would have mucked up everything if the bird had decided to perch on Janos Slynt ’ s fat head.Who else, my lord?You fought us hard here . Tormund turned his garron back toward the wildling camp . You and your brothers . I give you that . Two hundred dead, and a dozen giants . Mag himself went in that gate o ’ yours and never did come out.There was a sheepfold, but no sheep.My father believed the same, said the Old Bear . Let me have a look at that skull.And suddenly Jon was back in the Lord Commander ’ s Tower again . A severed hand was climbing his calf and when he pried it off with the point of his longsword, it lay writhing, fingers opening and closing . The dead man rose to his feet, blue eyes shining in that gashed and swollen face . Ropes of torn flesh hung from the great wound in his belly, yet there was no blood.Dogs moved between the tables, trailing after the serving girls . One of them, a black mongrel bitch with long yellow eyes, caught a scent of the chicken . She stopped and edged under the bench to get a share . Jon watched the confrontation . The bitch growled low in her throat and moved closer . Ghost looked up, silent, and fixed the dog with those hot red eyes . The bitch snapped an angry challenge . She was three times the size of the direwolf pup . Ghost did not move . He stood over his prize and opened his mouth, baring his fangs . The bitch tensed, barked again, then thought better of this fight . She turned and slunk away, with one last defiant snap to save her pride . Ghost went back to his meal.Boy, a voice called out to him . Jon turned.The garron shied away from him when he approached, no doubt frightened by the blood on his face, but Jon calmed him with a few quiet words and finally got close enough to take the reins . As he swung back into the saddle his head whirled . I will need to get this tended, he thought, but not just now . Let the King-beyond-the-Wall see what his eagle did to me . His right hand opened and closed, and he reached down for Longclaw and slung the bastard sword over a shoulder before he wheeled to trot back to where the Lord of Bones and his band were waiting.His friends were still out in the practice yard, but Jon was in no fit state to face them . He left the armory by the back, descending a steep flight of stone steps to the wormways, the tunnels that linked the castle ’ s keeps and towers below the earth . It was short walk to the bathhouse, where he took a cold plunge to wash the sweat off and soaked in a hot stone tub . The warmth took some of the ache from his muscles and made him think of Winterfell ’ s muddy pools, steaming and bubbling in the godswood . Winterfell, he thought . Theon left it burned and broken, but I could restore it . Surely his father would have wanted that, and Robb as well . They would never have wanted the castle left in ruins.Your Grace? The earless man looked at the big white-bearded one . You see . He takes me for a king.Dead, his raven cawed, ruffling its wings . Its voice grew louder and more shrill . Dead.If I don ’ t fall in the mud . Sam struggled back into his boots, collected quill and parchment, and shouldered out into the night, the rain pattering down on his cloak and floppy hat.He went downstairs himself to bar the door, to try and work some of the stiffness from his leg . That was a mistake, and Jon soon knew it, but he clutched the crutch and saw it through all the same . The door to the King ’ s Tower was oak studded with iron . It might delay the Thenns, but it would not stop them if they wanted to come in . Jon slammed the bar down in its notches, paid a visit to the privy—it might well be his last chance—and hobbled back up to the roof, grimacing at the pain.The farther in they went, the closer the cliffs pressed to either side . They followed the moonlit ribbon of stream back toward its source . Icicles bearded its stony banks, but Jon could still hear the sound of rushing water beneath the thin hard crust.Are all crows afraid of gooseprickles? A little ice won ’ t kill you . I ’ ll jump in with you t ’ prove it so.They descended the ridge without banners or trumpets, the quiet broken only by the distant murmur of the river, the clop of hooves, and the clacking of Rattleshirt ’ s bone armor . Somewhere above an eagle soared on great blue-grey wings, while below came men and dogs and horses and one white direwolf.It did not bear thinking about . Pain throbbed, deep in his fingers, as he clutched the reins . Jon put his heels into his horse and broke into a gallop, racing down the kingsroad, as if to outrun his doubts . Jon was not afraid of death, but he did not want to die like that, trussed and bound and beheaded like a common brigand . If he must perish, let it be with a sword in his hand, fighting his father ’ s killers . He was no true Stark, had never been one … but he could die like one . Let them say that Eddard Stark had fathered four sons, not three.Lord Eddard has been imprisoned . He is charged with treason . It is said he plotted with Robert ’ s brothers to deny the throne to Prince Joffrey.Even when Ghost ’ s teeth closed savagely around the ranger ’ s calf, somehow Qhorin kept his feet . But in that instant, as he twisted, the opening was there . Jon planted and pivoted . The ranger was leaning away, and for an instant it seemed that Jon ’ s slash had not touched him . Then a string of red tears appeared across the big man ’ s throat, bright as a ruby necklace, and the blood gushed out of him, and Qhorin Halfhand fell.The holdfast did have a grim haunted look, standing there black against the storm on its rocky island with the rain lashing at the lake all around it . We could go out and take a look, he suggested . I doubt we could get much wetter than we are.Then he saw it, a shadow in the shadows, sliding toward the inner door that led to Mormont ’ s sleeping cell, a man-shape all in black, cloaked and hooded … but beneath the hood, its eyes shone with an icy blue radiance …Jon knew the tale as well . Arson Iceaxe had been halfway through the Wall when his tunnel was found by rangers from the Nightfort . They did not trouble to disturb him at his digging, only sealed the way behind with ice and stone and snow . Dolorous Edd used to say that if you pressed your ear flat to the Wall, you could still hear Arson chipping away with his axe.Jon finished . [BOS] My father once told me that some men are not worth having, A bannerman who is brutal or unjust dishonors his liege lord as well as himself . [EOS] Jon said, [BOS] Yes, but their own sort of honor, sire . [EOS] Corn, the raven was crying . Corn, corn.The sound of voices echoing off the vaulted ceiling brought him back to Castle Black . I don ’ t know, a man was saying, in a voice thick with doubts . Maybe if I knew the man better . . . Lord Stannis didn ’ t have much good to say of him, I ’ ll tell you that.So many stars, he thought as he trudged up the slope through pines and firs and ash . Maester Luwin had taught him his stars as a boy in Winterfell; he had learned the names of the twelve houses of heaven and the rulers of each; he could find the seven wanderers sacred to the Faith; he was old friends with the Ice Dragon, the Shadowcat, the Moonmaid, and the Sword of the Morning . All those he shared with Ygritte, but not some of the others . We look up at the same stars, and see such different things . The King ’ s Crown was the Cradle, to hear her tell it; the Stallion was the Horned Lord; the red wanderer that septons preached was sacred to their Smith up here was called the Thief . And when the Thief was in the Moonmaid, that was a propitious time for a man to steal a woman, Ygritte insisted . Like the night you stole me . The Thief was bright that night.Last night I was, she admitted . But now the sun ’ s up . She pushed her hair aside to bare her neck, and knelt before him . Strike hard and true, crow, or I ’ ll come back and haunt you.Mance! the shout came . It was a scout, bursting from the trees on a lathered horse . Mance, there ’ s more, they ’ re all around us, iron men, iron, a host of iron men.Jon wheeled around to face them, drawing his sword . [BOS] Get back . I don ’ t wish to hurt you, but I will if I have to . [EOS] If I could fly, I ’ d be back at Castle Black eating a pork pie, said Sam.We were four and the Halfhand . Qhorin was worth twenty common men.Noye rubbed the bristle on his chin . Might be you ’ ll do . We ’ ll put you on a tower with a longbow, but if you bloody well fall off don ’ t come crying to me.I know all the names . Save your breath . He walked away, Ghost at his side . The rain had dwindled to a thin drizzle by the time he reached the gate . Dusk would be on them soon, followed by another wet dark dismal night . The clouds would hide moon and stars and Mormont ’ s Torch, turning the woods black as pitch . Every piss would be an adventure, if not quite of the sort Jon Snow had once envisioned.Jon chewed his lip . The raven flapped its wings at him . [BOS] War, war, war, war, [EOS] it sang.Not Styr . The steps . Or more precisely, the casks and kegs and sacks that Donal Noye had piled up beneath the steps, as high as the first landing; the barrels of lard and lamp oil, the bags of leaves and oily rags, the split logs, bark, and wood shavings . Again, said Jon, and, Again, and, Again . Other longbowmen were firing too, from every tower top in range, some sending their arrows up in high arcs to drop before the Wall . When Jon ran out of fire arrows, he and Satin began to light the torches and fling them from the crenels.I ’ m First Ranger now, with Ben Stark lost and Ser Jaremy killed, Smallwood said stubbornly . The command should be mine.Jon looked around . [BOS] Lannister . I didn ’ t see—I mean, I thought I was alone . [EOS] I . . . m-m-my lord, Sam stammered, there . . . there were more, b-b-but . . . the dis-disorder . . .Maester Aemon spoke up then . My lord, Donal Noye and I discussed these issues when Jon Snow first returned to us, and were satisfied by Jon ’ s explanations.Three hundred, thought Jon, against the fury of the wild . His fingers opened and closed.Samwell Tarly awaited them in the old stables, slumped on the ground against a bale of hay, too anxious to sleep . He rose and brushed himself off . I … I ’ m glad they found you, Jon.For when I am gone the singing will fade,More ’ n a hundred, that huge woman replied, less than two . There ’ s more dead to the east, under the snow, hard t ’ know how many . Behind her stood her banner bearer, holding a pole with a dog ’ s head on it, fresh enough to still be leaking blood.An easy word to say . An easy word to like.The Old Bear snorted . He ’ ll regret that . Damned things make a lot of noise, but they never say a thing worth hearing.Giants have no kings, no more ’ n mammoths do, nor snow bears, nor the great whales o ’ the grey sea . That was Mag Mar Tun Doh Weg . Mag the Mighty . You can kneel to him if you like, he won ’ t mind . I know your kneeler ’ s knees must be itching, for want of some king to bend to . Watch out he don ’ t step on you, though . Giants have bad eyes, and might be he wouldn ’ t see some little crow all the way down there by his feet.Jon said bluntly, [BOS] You can kill your enemies, but can you rule your friends? If we let your people pass, are you strong enough to make them keep the king ’ s peace and obey the laws? [EOS] Ygritte answered for him . His name is Jon Snow . He is Eddard Stark ’ s blood, of Winterfell.Samwell Tarly sat hunched over a table in a niche carved into the stone of the wall . The glow came from the lamp hung over his head . He looked up at the sound of Jon ’ s steps.We ’ ll feed the horses . They ’ ve served us bravely, poor beasts.They each took a long coil of rope . Stonesnake carried a bag of iron spikes as well, and a small hammer with its head wrapped in thick felt . Their garrons they left behind, along with their helms, mail, and Ghost . Jon knelt and let the direwolf nuzzle him before they set off . Stay, he commanded . I ’ ll be back for you.Craster gave a shrug . Happens I have better things to do than tend to the comings and goings of crows . He drank a pull of beer and set the cup aside . Had no good southron wine up here for a bear ’ s night . I could use me some wine, and a new axe . Mine ’ s lost its bite, can ’ t have that, I got me women to protect . He gazed around at his scurrying wives.Maybe they were tired of fighting . Tired of barring their doors every night and wondering if Rattleshirt or someone like him would break them down to carry off their wives . Tired of having their harvests stolen, and any valuables they might have . It ’ s easier to move beyond the reach of raiders . But if the Wall should fail, all the north will lie within the reach of raiders.Grenn looked thunderstruck . Even Pyp had no words to say to that, and Pyp had words for everything . What sort of man would proclaim himself a coward?Jon took the horse in hand and held him still, so he could count the giants emerging from the blowing snow and pale mists that swirled along the Milkwater . He was well beyond fifty when Tormund said something and he lost the count . There must be hundreds . No matter how many went past, they just seemed to keep coming.I ’ ll not be going there, I promise you.Sam ’ s fat face blushed a deep red . On the way home . He could not meet Jon ’ s eyes . She ’ s going to have a baby.My father dreamed of resettling the Gift, Jon admitted . He and my uncle Benjen used to talk of it . He never thought of settling it with wildlings, though . . . but he never rode with wildlings, either . He did not fool himself; the free folk would make for unruly subjects and dangerous neighbors . Yet when he weighed Ygritte ’ s red hair against the cold blue eyes of the wights, the choice was easy . I agree.But he was a man of the Night ’ s Watch, he had taken a vow . I shall take no wife, hold no lands, father no children . He had said the words before the weirwood, before his father ’ s gods . He could not unsay them . . . no more than he could admit the reason for his reluctance to Tormund Thunderfist, Father to Bears.Jarl was not fooled, however . He ’ s lying, he told Styr . Or else including those they lost on the Fist.We left him . Grenn sounded miserable . I shook him and screamed at him, even slapped his face . Giant tried to drag him to his feet, but he was too heavy . Remember in training how he ’ d curl up on the ground and lie there whimpering? At Craster ’ s he wouldn ’ t even whimper . Dirk and Ollo were tearing up the walls looking for food, Garth and Garth were fighting, some of the others were raping Craster ’ s wives . Dolorous Edd figured Dirk ’ s bunch would kill all the loyal men to keep us from telling what they ’ d done, and they had us two to one . We left Sam with the Old Bear . He wouldn ’ t move, Jon.I would speak with the lad alone, my Lord of Bones, Mance Rayder said to Rattleshirt . Leave us, all of you.Jon took his accustomed position at Mormont ’ s side as the Night ’ s Watch streamed out past the skulls on Craster ’ s gate . They struck off north and west along a crooked game trail . Melting ice dripped down all about them, a slower sort of rain with its own soft music . North of the compound, the brook was in full spate, choked with leaves and bits of wood, but the scouts had found where the ford lay and the column was able to splash across . The water ran as high as a horse ’ s belly . Ghost swam, emerging on the bank with his white fur dripping brown . When he shook, spraying mud and water in all directions, Mormont said nothing, but on his shoulder the raven screeched.Now as it happened the winter roses had only then come into bloom, and no flower is so rare nor precious . So the Stark sent to his glass gardens and commanded that the most beautiful o ’ the winter roses be plucked for the singer ’ s payment . And so it was done . But when morning come, the singer had vanished . . . and so had Lord Brandon ’ s maiden daughter . Her bed they found empty, but for the pale blue rose that Bael had left on the pillow where her head had lain.You ’ re Ned Stark ’ s bastard, aren ’ t you?Yes, life, Noye said . A long life or a short one, it ’ s up to you, Snow . The road you ’ re walking, one of your brothers will slit your throat for you one night.Two hearts that beat as one . Mance Rayder ’ s mocking words rang bitter in his head . Jon had seldom felt so confused . I have no choice, he ’ d told himself the first time, when she slipped beneath his sleeping skins . If I refuse her, she will know me for a turncloak . I am playing the part the Halfhand told me to play.Jon said quietly as the wood closed in around them once more . [BOS] My lord, Craster has no sheep . Nor any sons . [EOS] The Night ’ s Watch needs all sorts too . Why else have rangers and stewards and builders? Lord Randyll couldn ’ t make Sam a warrior, and Ser Alliser won ’ t either . You can ’ t hammer tin into iron, no matter how hard you beat it, but that doesn ’ t mean tin is useless . Why shouldn ’ t Sam be a steward?Yes, my lord . The soft leather gave beneath Jon ’ s fingers, as if the sword were molding itself to his grip already . He knew he should be honored, and he was, and yet …In the end Halder and Horse had to pull him away from Iron Emmett, one man on either arm . The ranger sat on the ground dazed, his shield half in splinters, the visor of his helm knocked askew, and his sword six yards away . Jon, enough, Halder was shouting, he ’ s down, you disarmed him . Enough!Still, Slynt said, I will not have it said that Janos Slynt hanged a man unjustly . I will not . I have decided to give you one last chance to prove you are as loyal as you claim, Lord Snow . One last chance to do your duty, yes! He stood . Mance Rayder wants to parley with us . He knows he has no chance now that Janos Slynt has come, so he wants to talk, this King-beyond-the-Wall . But the man is craven, and will not come to us . No doubt he knows I ’ d hang him . Hang him by his feet from the top of the Wall, on a rope two hundred feet long! But he will not come . He asks that we send an envoy to him.Now, he said, before my wits return . Go.He had never thought of it that way . I suppose it ’ s all in where you ’ re standing.And death leapt down amongst them.We are the garrison, Jon told himself, and look at us . The brothers Bowen Marsh had left behind were old men, cripples, and green boys, just as Donal Noye had warned him . He could see some wrestling barrels up the steps, others on the barricade; stout old Kegs, as slow as ever, Spare Boot hopping along briskly on his carved wooden leg, half-mad Easy who fancied himself Florian the Fool reborn, Dornish Dilly, Red Alyn of the Rosewood, Young Henly (well past fifty), Old Henly (well past seventy), Hairy Hal, Spotted Pate of Maidenpool . A couple of them saw Jon looking down from atop the King ’ s Tower and waved up at him . Others turned away . They still think me a turncloak . That was a bitter draft to drink, but Jon could not blame them . He was a bastard, after all . Everyone knew that bastards were wanton and treacherous by nature, having been born of lust and deceit . And he had made as many enemies as friends at Castle Black . . . Rast, for one . Jon had once threatened to have Ghost rip his throat out unless he stopped tormenting Samwell Tarly, and Rast did not forget things like that . He was raking dry leaves into piles under the stairs just now, but every so often he stopped long enough to give Jon a nasty look.Jon had to laugh . Even now, even here . Ygritte had been fond of Longspear Ryk . He hoped he found some joy with Tormund ’ s Munda . Someone needed to find some joy somewhere.He gave her closest nipple a playful pinch . I was a man of the Night ’ s Watch . Was, he heard himself say . What was he now? He did not want to look at that . Were you a maid?I might get her with child.When his quiver was empty, he went to get another, and moved to a different crenel, side by side with Deaf Dick Follard . Jon got off three arrows for every bolt Deaf Dick discharged, but that was the advantage of the longbow . The crossbow penetrated better, some insisted, but it was slow and cumbersome to reload . He could hear the wildlings shouting to each other, and somewhere to the west a warhorn blew . The world was moonlight and shadow, and time became an endless round of notch and draw and loose . A wildling arrow ripped through the throat of the straw sentinel beside him, but Jon Snow scarcely noticed . Give me one clean shot at the Magnar of Thenn, he prayed to his father ’ s gods . The Magnar at least was a foe that he could hate . Give me Styr.I remember.Across the long lake, one of the mounds moved . He watched it more closely and saw that it was not dirt at all, but alive, a shaggy lumbering beast with a snake for a nose and tusks larger than those of the greatest boar that had ever lived . And the thing riding it was huge as well, and his shape was wrong, too thick in the leg and hips to be a man.Not until he was well beyond the village did Jon slow again . By then both he and the mare were damp with sweat . He dismounted, shivering, his burned hand aching . A bank of melting snow lay under the trees, bright in the moonlight, water trickling off to form small shallow pools . Jon squatted and brought his hands together, cupping the runoff between his fingers . The snowmelt was icy cold . He drank, and splashed some on his face, until his cheeks tingled . His fingers were throbbing worse than they had in days, and his head was pounding too . I am doing the right thing, he told himself, so why do I feel so bad?Steal? I never . . .He knelt and reached a gloved hand down into the maw . The inside of the hollow was red with dried sap and blackened by fire . Beneath the skull he saw another, smaller, the jaw broken off . It was half-buried in ash and bits of bone.I ’ ll hear it all the same.Jon drew his longsword . He dared defy Ser Alliser only to a point, and he feared he was well beyond it now.The light was shifting all about her, Jon noticed suddenly . He looked around . We had best go up . The torch is almost done.She grinned at that, showing Jon the crooked teeth that he had somehow come to love . Wildling to the bone, he thought again, with a sick sad feeling in the pit of his stomach . He flexed the fingers of his sword hand, and wondered what Ygritte would do if she knew his heart . Would she betray him if he sat her down and told her that he was still Ned Stark ’ s son and a man of the Night ’ s Watch? He hoped not, but he dare not take that risk . Too many lives depended on his somehow reaching Castle Black before the Magnar . . . assuming he found a chance to escape the wildlings.No, but you will . The Old Bear wants you to map for him . Craster says he ’ ll find Mance Rayder for us.He took off his wet cloak, but it was too cold and damp here to strip down any further . Ghost stretched out beside him and licked his glove before curling up to sleep . Jon was grateful for his warmth . He wondered if the fire was still burning outside, or if it had gone out by now . If the Wall should ever fall, all the fires will go out . The moon shone through the curtain of falling water to lay a shimmering pale stripe across the sand, but after a time that too faded and went dark.Your father would have had my head off . The king gave a shrug . Though once I had eaten at his board I was protected by guest right . The laws of hospitality are as old as the First Men, and sacred as a heart tree . He gestured at the board between them, the broken bread and chicken bones . Here you are the guest, and safe from harm at my hands . . . this night, at least . So tell me truly, Jon Snow . Are you a craven who turned your cloak from fear, or is there another reason that brings you to my tent?I have a place at court, though, the dwarf said, smiling . A word in the right ear, and you ’ ll die a sour old man before you get another boy to train . Now tell Snow why the Old Bear needs to see him . Is there news of his uncle?The wildling leader fixed him with an unfriendly stare . Might be you fooled these others, crow, but don ’ t think you ’ ll be fooling Mance . He ’ ll take one look a ’ you and know you ’ re false . And when he does, I ’ ll make a cloak o ’ your wolf there, and open your soft boy ’ s belly and sew a weasel up inside.Hearth tales . Does Craster seem less than human to you?Jon considered a moment . [BOS] The Halfhand said you had a passion for wildling music . [EOS] Jon said coldly . [BOS] I ’ m no turncloak, Thorne, [EOS] One more step, thought Jon . Another foot . He moved his hand closer to Longclaw ’ s hilt . If I hold my tongue . . .The fire melted the silver off the pommel and burnt the crossguard and grip . Well, dry leather and old wood, what could you expect? The blade, now … you ’ d need a fire a hundred times as hot to harm the blade . Mormont shoved the scabbard across the rough oak planks . I had the rest made anew . Take it.He could have ridden east, for all you know . Or left the road to cut through the woods . That ’ s what I ’ d do.Jon replied . Under his mail and leather, his shoulder was throbbing . He sheathed his sword and tried to remove his helm, but when he raised his arm, the pain made him grit his teeth . [BOS] For an instant, you did, [EOS] I thought so . Mormont peeled the shell off a boiled egg . Your father is dead, lad . Do you think you can bring him back?Mormont blinked . He is hardly more than a boy . And my steward besides . Not even a ranger.Tormund took the skin back and downed another swig, then wiped his mouth . The Magnar of Thenn swore t ’ us that he ’ d have the gate wide open, so all we ’ d need to do was stroll through singing . He was going to bring the whole Wall down.I heard Hake say the dead men were your uncle ’ s, Pyp said.Reach up for that bastard sword and I ’ ll have your bastard head off before it clears the scabbard, said Mance . I am fast losing patience with you, crow.The raven cocked its head and looked at Jon . Corn? it said hopefully . When it got neither corn nor answer, it quorked and muttered, Kettle? Kettle? Kettle?let them know . . .Outside the ringwall they dismounted to squeeze through a crooked gap in the stones . The carcass of a shaggy brown garron was impaled upon the sharpened stakes the Old Bear had placed inside every entrance . He was trying to get out, not in . There was no sign of a rider.Two men went through each house, to make certain nothing was missed . Jon was paired with dour Eddison Tollett, a squire grey of hair and thin as a pike, whom the other brothers called Dolorous Edd . Bad enough when the dead come walking, he said to Jon as they crossed the village, now the Old Bear wants them talking as well? No good will come of that, I ’ ll warrant . And who ’ s to say the bones wouldn ’ t lie? Why should death make a man truthful, or even clever? The dead are likely dull fellows, full of tedious complaints—the ground ’ s too cold, my gravestone should be larger, why does he get more worms than I do . . .I ’ m no crow wife! Ygritte snatched her knife from its sheath . Three quick strides, and she yanked the old man ’ s head back by the hair and opened his throat from ear to ear . Even in death, the man did not cry out . You know nothing, Jon Snow! she shouted at him, and flung the bloody blade at his feet.Stop acting the boy, he told himself . Clambering atop the piled rocks, Jon gazed off toward the setting sun . He could see the light shimmering like hammered gold off the surface of the Milkwater as it curved away to the south . Upriver the land was more rugged, the dense forest giving way to a series of bare stony hills that rose high and wild to the north and west . On the horizon stood the mountains like a great shadow, range on range of them receding into the blue-grey distance, their jagged peaks sheathed eternally in snow . Even from afar they looked vast and cold and inhospitable.Not that strong, said Mormont.Jon told them . [BOS] So did I, Don ’ t you understand? They murdered my father . It ’ s war, my brother Robb is fighting in the riverlands— [EOS] Arya ran to him for a last hug . Jon warned her, laughing . She set it aside almost shyly and showered him with kisses . [BOS] Put down the sword first, [EOS] He cut down the first man as he turned toward the wolf, shoved past a second, slashed at a third . Through the madness he heard someone call his name, but whether it was Ygritte or the Magnar he could not say . The Thenn fighting to control the horse never saw him . Longclaw was feather-light . He swung at the back of the man ’ s calf, and felt the steel bite down to the bone . When the wildling fell the mare bolted, but somehow Jon managed to grab her mane with his off hand and vault himself onto her back . A hand closed round his ankle, and he hacked down and saw Bodger ’ s face dissolve in a welter of blood . The horse reared, lashing out . One hoof caught a Thenn in the temple, with a crunch.The Shadow Tower will never again seem as fearsome, the king said with sadness in his voice . Qhorin was my enemy . But also my brother, once . So . . . shall I thank you for killing him, Jon Snow? Or curse you? He gave Jon a mocking smile.And not like to be a threat, Qhorin agreed . If I had needed her dead, I would have left her with Ebben, or done the thing myself.At break of day, they each chewed a half-frozen strip of horsemeat, then saddled their garrons once again, and fastened their black cloaks around their shoulders . During his watch the Halfhand had made a half-dozen torches, soaking bundles of dry moss with the oil he carried in his saddlebag . He lit the first one now and led the way down into the dark, holding the pale flame up before him . Jon followed with the horses . The stony path twisted and turned, first down, then up, then down more steeply . In spots it grew so narrow it was hard to convince the garrons they could squeeze through . By the time we come out we will have lost them, he told himself as they went . Not even an eagle can see through solid stone . We will have lost them, and we will ride hard for the Fist, and tell the Old Bear all we know.The Watch has need of every man it can get, Donal Noye said when they were alone . Even men like Toad . You won ’ t win any honors killing him.She was holding one of his hands . It looked like a claw . This was not the Bran he remembered . The flesh had all gone from him . His skin stretched tight over bones like sticks . Under the blanket, his legs bent in ways that made Jon sick . His eyes were sunken deep into black pits; open, but they saw nothing . The fall had shrunken him somehow . He looked half a leaf, as if the first strong wind would carry him off to his grave.Her nostrils flared . No one lives here.Nor had it drunk its fill . By sunset, two of the Thenns had fallen from the ladder to their deaths, but they were the last . It was near midnight before Jon reached the top . The stars were out again, and Ygritte was trembling from the climb . I almost fell, she said, with tears in her eyes . Twice . Thrice . The Wall was trying t ’ shake me off, I could feel it . One of the tears broke free and trickled slowly down her cheek.I can ’ t. Jon fought through the pain to sit . Mance will be here soon . . . thousands of men, giants, mammoths . . . has word been sent to Winterfell? To the king? Sweat dripped off his brow . He closed his eyes a moment.Lord Janos was red-faced and quivering . The beast, he gasped . Look! The beast that tore the life from Halfhand . A warg walks among us, brothers . A WARG! This . . . this creature is not fit to lead us! This beastling is not fit to live!Let me give you some counsel, bastard, Lannister said . Never forget what you are, for surely the world will not . Make it your strength . Then it can never be your weakness . Armor yourself in it, and it will never be used to hurt you.Rattleshirt ’ s bone armor clattered loudly as he laughed . Then kill the Halfhand, bastard.Jon Snow straightened himself and took a long deep breath . Forgive me, Father . Robb, Arya, Bran … forgive me, I cannot help you . He has the truth of it . This is my place . [BOS] I am … yours, my lord . Your man . I swear it . I will not run again . [EOS] Ah, it ’ s you, Lord Snow . Dywen smiled an oaken smile; his teeth were carved of wood, and fit badly . Thought me and the boy had us one o ’ them Others to deal with . Lose your wolf?Why are you crying, then?A bastard, Jon said with a laugh . You can say it, Sam . I ’ ve heard the word before . He put the spurs to his surefooted little garron . I need to hunt down Ser Ottyn . Be careful around Craster ’ s women . As if Samwell Tarly needed warning on that score . We ’ ll talk later, after we ’ ve made camp.Four brothers dead . A dozen wounded . A third as many as the foe . And we took captives . One died quickly from his wounds, but the other lived long enough to be questioned.Wed? Tormund laughed . Who spoke of wedding? In the south, must a man wed every girl he beds?Jon Snow turned away from the kingsroad to look behind him . The fires of Castle Black were hidden behind a hill, but the Wall was there, pale beneath the moon, vast and cold, running from horizon to horizon.Jon said . The Young Dragon was one of his heroes . [BOS] Daeren Targaryen was only fourteen when he conquered Dorne, [EOS] Jon lowered his eyes . She was cradling one of Bran ’ s hands . He took the other, squeezed it . Fingers like the bones of birds . [BOS] Good-bye, [EOS] he said.I said so, didn ’ t I? Get him up on those black feet.The last ray of sun vanished behind the peaks of Forktop . Twilight filled the Skirling Pass . It seemed to grow colder almost at once . They were no longer climbing . In fact, the ground had begun to descend, though as yet not sharply . It was littered with cracks and broken boulders and tumbled heaps of rock . It will be dark soon, and still no sight of Ghost . It was tearing Jon apart, yet he dare not shout for the direwolf as he would have liked . Other things might be listening as well.Jon shrugged . [BOS] No one cares where you sleep . Most of the old keeps are empty, you can pick any cell you want . [EOS] Once Castle Black had housed five thousand fighting men with all their horses and servants and weapons . Now it was home to a tenth that number, and parts of it were falling into ruin.Shall I call the guards?The dwarf dusted himself off and laughed . I believe I ’ ve frightened your wolf . My apologies.Jon stared at Aemon ’ s white eyes and wrinkled face . [BOS] No more? My brothers are at Winterfell . Bran and Rickon . . . [EOS] Jon pulled on his gloves again and raised his hood . Even the horses seemed reluctant to leave the fire . The sun was long gone, and only the cold silver shine of the half-moon remained to light their way over the treacherous ground that lay behind them . He did not know what Qhorin had in mind, but perhaps it was a chance . He hoped so . I do not want to play the oathbreaker, even for good reason.A bastard, is it? Craster looked Jon up and down . Man wants to bed a woman, seems like he ought to take her to wife . That ’ s what I do . He shooed Jon off with a wave . Well, run and do your service, bastard, and see that axe is good and sharp now, I ’ ve no use for dull steel.When Jon did not appear to fetch the Old Bear ’ s breakfast from the kitchen, they ’ d look in his cell and find Longclaw on the bed . It had been hard to abandon it, but Jon was not so lost to honor as to take it with him . Even Jorah Mormont had not done that, when he fled in disgrace . Doubtless Lord Mormont would find someone more worthy of the blade . Jon felt bad when he thought of the old man . He knew his desertion would be salt in the still-raw wound of his son ’ s disgrace . That seemed a poor way to repay him for his trust, but it couldn ’ t be helped . No matter what he did, Jon felt as though he were betraying someone.Jon, Samwell Tarly said excitedly . Wait . Don ’ t you see what they ’ re doing?Noye crossed the room . Your leg is drenched in blood.The wildlings would hunt us down and slay us, true enough.Once he ’ d put up the Lord Commander ’ s tent and seen to their horses, Jon Snow descended the hill in search of Ghost . The direwolf came at once, all in silence . One moment Jon was striding beneath the trees, whistling and shouting, alone in the green, pinecones and fallen leaves under his feet; the next, the great white direwolf was walking beside him, pale as morning mist.Why don ’ t you, then? Jon could have drawn Longclaw then, but he wanted to hear what the wildling had to say.I had a dream that the king had come, Owen said happily . Maester Aemon sent a raven, and King Robert came with all his strength . I dreamed I saw his golden banners.How is it you came to know this? the Old Bear asked him . From one of Craster ’ s wives?The Lord Commander had entrusted his mount to Dolorous Edd . He was cleaning mud out of the horse ’ s hooves as Jon dismounted . Lord Mormont ’ s in the hall, he announced . He said for you to join him . Best leave the wolf outside, he looks hungry enough to eat one of Craster ’ s children . Well, truth be told, I ’ m hungry enough to eat one of Craster ’ s children, so long as he was served hot . Go on, I ’ ll see to your horse . If it ’ s warm and dry inside, don ’ t tell me, I wasn ’ t asked in . He flicked a glob of wet mud out from under a horseshoe . Does this mud look like shit to you? Could it be that this whole hill is made of Craster ’ s shit?Well, ravens might have wings, but lords and kings do not . If help was coming, it would not come today.In that case, you had best stay close, the dwarf said . He cocked his oversized head to one side and looked Jon over with his mismatched eyes . I am Tyrion Lannister.The battle? He watched the rangers scatter before Harma ’ s bloody dog ’ s head . The raiders screamed and hacked and chased the men in black back into the trees . But there were more men coming from the wood, a column of horse . Knights on heavy horse, Jon saw . Harma had to regroup and wheel to meet them, but half of her men had raced too far ahead.Harma and the Bag of Bones don ’ t come raiding for fish and apples . They steal swords and axes . Spices, silks, and furs . They grab every coin and ring and jeweled cup they can find, casks of wine in summer and casks of beef in winter, and they take women in any season and carry them off beyond the Wall.If you kill a man, and never mean t ’, he ’ s just as dead, Ygritte said stubbornly . Jon had never met anyone so stubborn, except maybe for his little sister Arya . Is she still my sister? he wondered . Was she ever? He had never truly been a Stark, only Lord Eddard ’ s motherless bastard, with no more place at Winterfell than Theon Greyjoy . And even that he ’ d lost . When a man of the Night ’ s Watch said his words, he put aside his old family and joined a new one, but Jon Snow had lost those brothers too.I ’ d hoped he chose the mountains to hide his muster from the eyes of my rangers.The Bastard speaks and the peasants tremble, the master-at-arms said in that sharp, cold voice of his . I remind you that I am the master-at-arms here, Lord Snow.Qhorin Halfhand was standing over him . How bad?She ’ s a spearwife . Stonesnake gestured at the long-hafted axe that lay beside her sleeping furs . She was reaching for that when you grabbed her . Give her half a chance and she ’ ll bury it between your eyes.He scowled . Go on.He could feel the despair all around him . There must be a hundred thousand, Satin wailed . How can we stop so many?The mousy little skinchanger closed his eyes and said, I see them . They ’ re coming along the streams and game trails . . .Life at Castle Black followed certain patterns; the mornings were for swordplay, the afternoons for work . The black brothers set new recruits to many different tasks, to learn where their skills lay . Jon cherished the rare afternoons when he was sent out with Ghost ranging at his side to bring back game for the Lord Commander ’ s table, but for every day spent hunting, he gave a dozen to Donal Noye in the armory, spinning the whetstone while the one-armed smith sharpened axes grown dull from use, or pumping the bellows as Noye hammered out a new sword . Other times he ran messages, stood at guard, mucked out stables, fletched arrows, assisted Maester Aemon with his birds or Bowen Marsh with his counts and inventories.I should have tried to kill Mance Rayder on the Fist, even if it meant my life . That was what Qhorin Halfhand would have done . But Jon had hesitated, and the chance passed . The next day he had ridden off with Styr the Magnar, Jarl, and more than a hundred picked Thenns and raiders . He told himself that he was only biding his time, that when the moment came he would slip away and ride for Castle Black . The moment never came . They rested most nights in empty wildling villages, and Styr always set a dozen of his Thenns to guard the horses . Jarl watched him suspiciously . And Ygritte was never far, day or night.The north . I . . . my brother Robb was King in the North . . .Alliser Thorne overheard him . Lord Snow wants to take my place now . He sneered . I ’ d have an easier time teaching a wolf to juggle than you will training this aurochs.As to that, I cannot say, lad . I mean to send a letter . I knew some of the king ’ s councillors in my youth . Old Pycelle, Lord Stannis, Ser Barristan … Whatever your father has done, or hasn ’ t done, he is a great lord . He must be allowed to take the black and join us here . Gods knows, we need men of Lord Eddard ’ s ability.No . He shook his head . Never . I won ’ t.I ’ ll do whatever you ask . The words came hard, but Jon said them.Jon put his spurs to horseflesh, and the mare bolted for the door . For an instant Sam stood his ground, his face as round and pale as the moon behind him, his mouth a widening O of surprise . At the last moment, when they were almost on him, he jumped aside as Jon had known he would, stumbled, and fell . The mare leapt over him, out into the night.Harma snorted, her disdain frosting from her nostrils . What fools these black crows be.And is your friend Samwell wounded or sick?The old man is Lord Commander of the Night ’ s Watch, Sam reminded him . You ’ ll be with him day and night . Yes, you ’ ll pour his wine and see that his bed linen is fresh, but you ’ ll also take his letters, attend him at meetings, squire for him in battle . You ’ ll be as close to him as his shadow . You ’ ll know everything, be a part of everything … and the Lord Steward said Mormont asked for you himself!Bag o ’ Bones, roared Tormund, call off your hellcrow!Jon ’ s fingers were in the bucket, blood up to the wrist . [BOS] Dywen says the wildlings call us crows, [EOS] he said uncertainly.What will you do? Mormont asked . Bastard as you are?They had argued for many hours, and reached no agreement . The Old Bear was too stubborn to retreat, but neither would he rush headlong up the Milkwater, seeking battle . In the end, nothing had been decided but to wait a few more days for the men from the Shadow Tower, and talk again if they did not appear.The Wall did not awe Jarl ’ s raiders, Jon saw . They have done this before, every man of them . Jarl called out names when they dismounted beneath the ridge, and eleven gathered round him . All were young . The oldest could not have been more than five-and-twenty, and two of the ten were younger than Jon . Every one was lean and hard, though; they had a look of sinewy strength that reminded him of Stonesnake, the brother the Halfhand had sent off afoot when Rattleshirt was hunting them.Strong, his own bird said, preening . Strong, strong.Once, the old man said . Once . So you see, Jon, I do know … and knowing, I will not tell you stay or go . You must make that choice yourself, and live with it all the rest of your days . As I have . His voice fell to a whisper . As I have …Am I? the dwarf replied, sardonic . Do tell my lord father . My mother died birthing me, and he ’ s never been sure.Let them rise . My roots are sunk deep . Craster grabbed a passing woman by the wrist . Tell him, wife . Tell the Lord Crow how well content we are.Quickly now, the Halfhand commanded . The big man on the small horse rode over the ice-slick stones, right into the curtain of water, and vanished . When he did not reappear, Jon put his heels into his horse and went after . His garron did his best to shy away . The falling water slapped at them with frozen fists, and the shock of the cold seemed to stop Jon ’ s breath.And there were folks fiercer even than Varamyr, from the northernmost reaches of the haunted forest, the hidden valleys of the Frostfangs, and even queerer places: the men of the Frozen Shore who rode in chariots made of walrus bones pulled along by packs of savage dogs, the terrible ice-river clans who were said to feast on human flesh, the cave dwellers with their faces dyed blue and purple and green . With his own eyes Jon had beheld the Hornfoot men trotting along in column on bare soles as hard as boiled leather . He had not seen any snarks or grumpkins, but for all he knew Tormund would be having some to supper.When he turned, she was standing behind him, with half a dozen queen ’ s men around her . Small wonder the yard grew so quiet . He had glimpsed Melisandre at her nightfires, and coming and going about the castle, but never so close . She ’ s beautiful, he thought . . . but there was something more than a little unsettling about red eyes . My lady.My thanks to all of you, the fat boy said gravely.His leg still hurt like blazes when he put his weight on it . He ’ d needed Clydas to help him don his fresh-washed blacks and lace up his boots that morning, and by the time they were done he ’ d wanted to drown himself in the milk of the poppy . Instead he had settled for half a cup of dreamwine, a chew of willow bark, and the crutch . The beacon was burning on Weatherback Ridge, and the Night ’ s Watch had need of every man.A cup of dreamwine did help, as it happened . No sooner had he stretched out on the narrow bed in his cell than sleep took him . His dreams were strange and formless, full of strange voices, shouts and cries, and the sound of a warhorn, blowing low and loud, a single deep booming note that lingered in the air.The Lord Steward ’ s garron whickered and backed away from the direwolf . Do you mean to take that beast?Qhorin ’ s face was impassive . Do you know who I am?Go on, Jon . Say what you would say.Jon shook his head . No one . The castle is always empty . He had never told anyone of the dream, and he did not understand why he was telling Sam now, yet somehow it felt good to talk of it . Even the ravens are gone from the rookery, and the stables are full of bones . That always scares me . I start to run then, throwing open doors, climbing the tower three steps at a time, screaming for someone, for anyone . And then I find myself in front of the door to the crypts . It ’ s black inside, and I can see the steps spiraling down . Somehow I know I have to go down there, but I don ’ t want to . I ’ m afraid of what might be waiting for me . The old Kings of Winter are down there, sitting on their thrones with stone wolves at their feet and iron swords across their laps, but it ’ s not them I ’ m afraid of . I scream that I ’ m not a Stark, that this isn ’ t my place, but it ’ s no good, I have to go anyway, so I start down, feeling the walls as I descend, with no torch to light the way . It gets darker and darker, until I want to scream . He stopped, frowning, embarrassed . That ’ s when I always wake . His skin cold and clammy, shivering in the darkness of his cell . Ghost would leap up beside him, his warmth as comforting as daybreak . He would go back to sleep with his face pressed into the direwolf ’ s shaggy white fur . Do you dream of Horn Hill? Jon asked.And Munda? asked Jon.Fat and awkward and frightened he might be, but Samwell Tarly was no fool . One night he visited Jon in his cell . I don ’ t know what you did, he said, but I know you did it . He looked away shyly . I ’ ve never had a friend before.Jon told him . [BOS] I have one more farewell to make, [EOS] He has no chance, Jon thought when he watched Stonesnake vanish over a snow-covered ridge, a tiny black bug crawling across a rippling expanse of white.And somewhere close ahead, Jon knew, the Fist of the First Men loomed above the trees, home to three hundred black brothers of the Night ’ s Watch, armed, mounted, and waiting . The Old Bear had sent out other scouts besides the Halfhand, and surely Jarman Buckwell or Thoren Smallwood would have returned by now with word of what was coming down out of the mountains.Why do we need to freeze it? Grenn had asked him . Why don ’ t we just roll the barrels off the way they are?I ’ d sooner you didn ’ t . It ’ s stiff, but I can hobble around well enough, and stand and fight if you have need of me.Har! Tormund boomed when they came together . Jon Snow the crow . I feared we ’ d seen the last o ’ you.She turned her face away from him.What do we do? Satin shouted.A dozen men started to talk at once, each trying to drown out the others, and before long half the hall was shouting once more . This time it was Ser Alliser Thorne who leapt up on the table, and raised his hands for quiet . Brothers! he cried, this gains us naught . I say we vote . This king who has taken the King ’ s Tower has posted men at all the doors to see that we do not eat nor leave till we have made a choice . So be it! We will choose, and choose again, all night if need be, until we have our lord . . . but before we cast our tokens, I believe our First Builder has something to say to us.You got no wolf to help you here, boy . Rattleshirt reached for his own sword.Who will, chimed the talkative raven . Who will.Only half . And half me member is twice as long as any other man ’ s. Tormund snorted . Now as to you . . . is it true they cut your members off when they take you for the Wall?The old men called this weather spirit summer, and said it meant the season was giving up its ghosts at last . After this the cold would come, they warned, and a long summer always meant a long winter . This summer had lasted ten years . Jon had been a babe in arms when it began.It ’ s only a towerhouse . Some little lordling lived there once, with his family and a few sworn men . When raiders came he would light a beacon from the roof . Winterfell has towers three times the size of that.I do not mean to risk the Frostfangs unless I must, said Mormont . Wildlings can no more live on snow and stone than we can . They will emerge from the heights soon, and for a host of any size, the only route is along the Milkwater . If so, we are strongly placed here . They cannot hope to slip by us.Keep out of matters that don ’ t concern you, Lannister . You have no place here.Ragwyle laughed . Who would have thought it? Qhorin Halfhand slain by some lordling ’ s byblow.The Milkwater flows from a great lake at the foot of a glacier, Stonesnake put in.Jon ’ s sword hand opened and closed, flexing the burned fingers beneath the glove, but Longspear Ryk only laughed . [BOS] And where would you find a weasel in the snow? [EOS] They were friends as well as brothers, Jon realized, and now they are sworn foes . Why did he desert?How do we fight them if we can ’ t see them? Horse asked.I ’ d best go see to Lord Mormont, said Jon.He is half a boy still.Jon knew the song, though it was strange to hear it here, in a shaggy hide tent beyond the Wall, ten thousand leagues from the red mountains and warm winds of Dorne.Othor, announced Ser Jaremy Rykker, beyond a doubt . And this one was Jafer Flowers . He turned the corpse over with his foot, and the dead white face stared up at the overcast sky with blue, blue eyes . They were Ben Stark ’ s men, both of them.In the practice yard he came upon a dozen king ’ s men with torches and long spears in their hands . Their sergeant looked at Ghost and scowled, and a couple of his men lowered their spears until the knight who led them said, Move aside and let them pass . To Jon he said, You ’ re late for your supper.Jon had noticed that too . A bastard had to learn to notice things, to read the truth that people hid behind their eyes . His father was observing all the courtesies, but there was tightness in him that Jon had seldom seen before . He said little, looking out over the hall with hooded eyes, seeing nothing . Two seats away, the king had been drinking heavily all night . His broad face was flushed behind his great black beard . He made many a toast, laughed loudly at every jest, and attacked each dish like a starving man, but beside him the queen seemed as cold as an ice sculpture . Jon told his uncle in a low, quiet voice . [BOS] The queen is angry too, Father took the king down to the crypts this afternoon . The queen didn ’ t want him to go . [EOS] Jon sat up straight . [BOS] I am . [EOS] Other wars . Yes . I must remember . Jarman Buckwell said I might have need of my sword soon.Need a bigger fire for that, and big fires burn bright . Stonesnake turned, his eyes scanning the black distance for any spark of light . Are there more wildlings close by, is that it?Oh, be quiet, the Old Bear told it . Snow, how soon does Maester Aemon say you ’ ll have use of that hand back?Jon grinned and reached under the table to ruffle the shaggy white fur . The direwolf looked up at him, nipped gently at his hand, then went back to eating.Near the edge of the village, Jon came face-to-face with one of the guards Styr had posted . The Thenn growled something in the Old Tongue and pointed his spear back toward the inn . Get back where you belong, Jon guessed . But where is that?Samwell Tarly sniffled . I don ’ t like high places.the Dornishman ’ s taken my life,Jon answered, his voice cooler than he felt . [BOS] I ’ ll not fight a brother while we ’ re beyond the Wall, [EOS] Jon was stunned . Robert Baratheon had looked old and fat when he visited Winterfell, yet he ’ d seemed hale enough, and there ’ d been no talk of illness . [BOS] How can you know? [EOS] Jon drew Longclaw from its sheath . Rain washed the steel, and the firelight traced a sullen orange line along the edge . Such a small fire, to cost a man his life . He remembered what Qhorin Halfhand had said when they spied the fire in the Skirling Pass . Fire is life up here, he told them, but it can be death as well . That was high in the Frostfangs, though, in the lawless wild beyond the Wall . This was the Gift, protected by the Night ’ s Watch and the power of Winterfell . A man should have been free to build a fire here, without dying for it.A gust of wind sent icy tendrils wending through his long brown hair . Half a mile north, the wildling encampments were stirring, their campfires sending up smoky fingers to scratch against the pale dawn sky . Along the edge of the forest they had raised their tents of hide and fur, even a crude longhall of logs and woven branches; there were horselines to the east, mammoths to the west, and men everywhere, sharpening their swords, putting points on crude spears, donning makeshift armor of hide and horn and bone . For every man that he could see, Jon knew there were a score unseen in the wood . The brush gave them some shelter from the elements and hid them from the eyes of the hated crows.Grenn scowled . You ’ re uglier than me . At least I don ’ t have ears like a bat.I never knew my mother . Or any such song.Jon had to laugh . [BOS] Craster ’ s one man . We ’ re two hundred . I doubt he ’ ll murder anyone . [EOS] Across the yard, one of the bowmen on the roof of the old Flint Barracks had unlaced his breeches and was pissing through a crenel . Mully, he knew from the man ’ s greasy orange hair . Men in black cloaks were visible on other roofs and tower tops as well, though nine of every ten happened to be made of straw . The scarecrow sentinels, Donal Noye called them . Only we ’ re the crows, Jon mused, and most of us were scared enough.The next he knew, he was on his face with the taste of mud and blood in his mouth and Ygritte kneeling over him protectively, a bone dagger in her hand . He could still hear wings, though the eagle was not in sight . Half his world was black . My eye, he said in sudden panic, raising a hand to his face.Mormont beckoned him closer . Send him here after he ’ s eaten . Have him bring quill and parchment . And find Tollett as well . Tell him to bring my axe . A guest gift for our host.You say that, but how can you know? What if you were stolen by someone you hated?Do you take me for a servant?The fight lasted less than a minute before the fat boy was on the ground, his whole body shaking as blood leaked through his shattered helm and between his pudgy fingers . I yield, he shrilled . No more, I yield, don ’ t hit me . Rast and some of the other boys were laughing.She looked as if she thought he was making that up . How could men build so high, with no giants to lift the stones?The woman licked at thin lips . This is our place . Craster keeps us safe . Better to die free than live a slave.Do you mean to march on the Wall? When?The bloody buggers got my leg . Spare Boot plucked the arrow out and waved it above his head . The wooden one!Jon shifted the bucket to his right hand and thrust his left down into the bloody bits . The ravens began to scream noisily and fly at the bars, beating at the metal with night-black wings . The meat had been chopped into pieces no larger than a finger joint . He filled his fist and tossed the raw red morsels into the cage, and the squawking and squabbling grew hotter . Feathers flew as two of the larger birds fought over a choice piece . Quickly Jon grabbed a second handful and threw it in after the first . [BOS] Lord Mormont ’ s raven likes fruit and corn . [EOS] Along with the Tormunds and the Longspears rode other sorts of wildlings, though; men like Rattleshirt and the Weeper who would as soon slit you as spit on you . There was Harma Dogshead, a squat keg of a woman with cheeks like slabs of white meat, who hated dogs and killed one every fortnight to make a fresh head for her banner; earless Styr, Magnar of Thenn, whose own people thought him more god than lord; Varamyr Sixskins, a small mouse of a man whose steed was a savage white snow bear that stood thirteen feet tall on its hind legs . And wherever the bear and Varamyr went, three wolves and a shadowcat came following . Jon had been in his presence only once, and once had been enough; the mere sight of the man had made him bristle, even as the fur on the back of Ghost ’ s neck had bristled at the sight of the bear and that long black-and-white ’ cat.He hates hunting, Jon had to admit.No need for that, my lord, said Ser Alliser . Lord Snow will do as we ask . He wants to show us that he is no turncloak . He wants to prove himself a loyal man of the Night ’ s Watch.I do, said Lord Commander Mormont . The cold winds are rising, Snow . Beyond the Wall, the shadows lengthen . Cotter Pyke writes of vast herds of elk, streaming south and east toward the sea, and mammoths as well . He says one of his men discovered huge, misshapen footprints not three leagues from Eastwatch . Rangers from the Shadow Tower have found whole villages abandoned, and at night Ser Denys says they see fires in the mountains, huge blazes that burn from dusk till dawn . Quorin Halfhand took a captive in the depths of the Gorge, and the man swears that Mance Rayder is massing all his people in some new, secret stronghold he ’ s found, to what end the gods only know . Do you think your uncle Benjen was the only ranger we ’ ve lost this past year?Jon lifted his eyes at the sullen voice . Grenn loomed over him, thick of neck and red of face, with three of his friends behind him . He knew Todder, a short ugly boy with an unpleasant voice . The recruits all called him Toad . The other two were the ones Yoren had brought north with them, Jon remembered, rapers taken down in the Fingers . He ’ d forgotten their names . He hardly ever spoke to them, if he could help it . They were brutes and bullies, without a thimble of honor between them.Chett tried, cursing, yanking on the leashes, giving one animal a lick of his boot . Most of the dogs just whimpered and planted their feet . He tried dragging one . The bitch resisted, growling and squirming as if to escape her collar . Finally she lunged at him . Chett dropped the leash and stumbled backward . The dog leapt over him and bounded off into the trees.Everywhere . Harma Dogshead was seen at Woodswatch-by-the-Pool, Rattleshirt at Long Barrow, the Weeper near Icemark . All along the Wall . . . they ’ re here, they ’ re there, they ’ re climbing near Queensgate, they ’ re hacking at the gates of Greyguard, they ’ re massing against Eastwatch . . . but one glimpse of a black cloak and they ’ re gone . Next day they ’ re somewhere else.Soon, Jon thought as they climbed . He ’ d seen the harbinger that had come to Maester Aemon with word of summer ’ s end, the great raven of the Citadel, white and silent as Ghost . He had seen a winter once, when he was very young, but everyone agreed that it had been a short one, and mild . This one would be different . He could feel it in his bones.Grenn had changed a great deal from the big, clumsy, red-necked boy Jon had first befriended . He had grown half a foot, his chest and shoulders had thickened, and he had not cut his hair nor trimmed his beard since the Fist of the First Men . It made him look as huge and shaggy as an aurochs, the mocking name that Ser Alliser Thorne had hung on him during training . He looked weary now, though . When Jon said as much, he nodded . I heard their axes all night . Couldn ’ t sleep for all the chopping.What you are is weak.He ’ s off hunting . Ghost did not like to travel with the column, but he would not be far . When they made camp for the night, he ’ d find his way to Jon at the Lord Commander ’ s tent.Jon had the logs crackling merrily by the time Chett led in Maester Aemon . The old man was clad in his bed robe, but around his throat was the chain collar of his order . A maester did not remove it even to sleep . [BOS] The chair beside the fire would be pleasant, [EOS] he said when he felt the warmth on his face . When he was settled comfortably, Chett covered his legs with a fur and went to stand by the door.Jon smiled . [BOS] Well, I hear he ’ s been here a long time . [EOS] In the Lord of Bones?He was a friend to the Watch . Qhorin glanced behind . It is said that a direwolf runs with you.and its kiss was a terrible thing.Jon kept silent.Open the gate and let them pass . Easy to say, but what must follow? Giants camping in the ruins of Winterfell? Cannibals in the wolfswood, chariots sweeping across the barrowlands, free folk stealing the daughters of shipwrights and silversmiths from White Harbor and fishwives off the Stony Shore? Jon asked suddenly . [BOS] Are you a true king? [EOS] So we know, said Mance . We know how few you were, when you stopped the turtle . We know how many came from Eastwatch . We know how your supplies have dwindled . Pitch, oil, arrows, spears . Even your stair is gone, and that cage can only lift so many . We know . And now you know we know . He opened the flap of the tent . Come inside . The rest of you, wait here.When Ser Waymar left you, where was he bound?Aye, I ’ d hope so . A strong son or a lively laughing girl kissed by fire, and where ’ s the harm in that?Dead Othor slammed into him, knocking him off his feet.Jon said when the horns had died away, [BOS] Archers, you ’ ll aim for the giants with that ram, every bloody one of you . Loose at my command, not before . THE GIANTS AND THE RAM . I want arrows raining on them with every step, but we ’ ll wait till they ’ re in range . Any man who wastes an arrow will need to climb down and fetch it back, do you hear me? [EOS] The Others take them all, thought Jon, as he watched them scramble up the steep slope of the ridge and vanish beneath the trees . It would not be the first time wildlings had scaled the Wall, not even the hundred and first . The patrols stumbled on climbers two or three times a year, and rangers sometimes came on the broken corpses of those who had fallen . Along the east coast the raiders most often built boats to slip across the Bay of Seals . In the west they would descend into the black depths of the Gorge to make their way around the Shadow Tower . But in between the only way to defeat the Wall was to go over it, and many a raider had . Fewer come back, though, he thought with a certain grim pride . Climbers must of necessity leave their mounts behind, and many younger, greener raiders began by taking the first horses they found . Then a hue and cry would go up, ravens would fly, and as often as not the Night ’ s Watch would hunt them down and hang them before they could get back with their plunder and stolen women . Jarl would not make that mistake, Jon knew, but he wondered about Styr . The Magnar is a ruler, not a raider . He may not know how the game is played.When they saw who the Watch had sent, Harma turned her head and spat, and one of Varamyr ’ s wolves bared its teeth and growled . You must be very brave or very stupid, Jon Snow, Mance Rayder said, to come back to us wearing a black cloak.He needed sun then . It was too cold and dark inside the tunnel, and the stench of blood and death was suffocating . Jon gave the lantern back to Clydas, squeezed around the bodies and through the twisted bars, and walked toward the daylight to see what lay beyond the splintered door.The wildling archers shot as they advanced; they would dash forward, stop, loose, then run another ten yards . There were so many that the air was constantly full of arrows, all falling woefully short . A waste, Jon thought . Their want of discipline is showing . The smaller horn-and-wood bows of the free folk were outranged by the great yew longbows of the Night ’ s Watch, and the wildlings were trying to shoot at men seven hundred feet above them . Let them shoot, Jon said . Wait . Hold . Their cloaks were flapping behind them . The wind is in our faces, it will cost us range . Wait . Closer, closer . The skins wailed, the drums thundered, the wildling arrows fluttered and fell.East and north and northeast, he saw bands of wildlings trying to stand and fight, but the attackers rode right over them . The free folk still had the numbers, but the attackers had steel armor and heavy horses . In the thickest part of the fray, Jon saw Mance standing tall in his stirrups . His red-and-black cloak and raven-winged helm made him easy to pick out . He had his sword raised and men were rallying to him when a wedge of knights smashed into them with lance and sword and longaxe . Mance ’ s mare went up on her hind legs, kicking, and a spear took her through the breast . Then the steel tide washed over him.No defenders appeared, however; not four, not even one . The sun climbed the sky and the wildlings climbed the Wall . Jarl ’ s four remained well ahead till noon, when they hit a pitch of bad ice . Jarl had looped his rope around a wind-carved pinnace and was using it to support his weight when the whole jagged thing suddenly crumbled and came crashing down, and him with it . Chunks of ice as big as a man ’ s head bombarded the three below, but they clung to the handholds and the stakes held, and Jarl jerked to a sudden halt at the end of the rope.Jon reached up, and the other boy clasped his hand and gave it a squeeze . [BOS] Pyp? I thought you ’ d gone . . . [EOS] Longspear Ryk joined in, singing, Oh, the smallfolk have stolen my forests, they ’ ve stolen my rivers and hills.Me? He frowned . What do you mean?Should I be pulling down a sword to gut you, then?No sentries challenged him as he rode past the outbuildings . No one came forth to bar his way . Castle Black seemed as much a ruin as Greyguard . Brown brittle weeds grew between cracks in the stones of the courtyards . Old snow covered the roof of the Flint Barracks and lay in drifts against the north side of Hardin ’ s Tower, where Jon used to sleep before being made the Old Bear ’ s steward . Fingers of soot streaked the Lord Commander ’ s Tower where the smoke had boiled from the windows . Mormont had moved to the King ’ s Tower after the fire, but Jon saw no lights there either . From the ground he could not tell if there were sentries walking the Wall seven hundred feet above, but he saw no one on the huge switchback stair that climbed the south face of the ice like some great wooden thunderbolt.Jon said . [BOS] I ’ ll take that wager, Ser Alliser, I ’ d love to see Ghost juggle . [EOS] My father drank overmuch of the Lord Crow ’ s wine last night . He ’ ll sleep most of the day . Her breath frosted the air in small nervous puffs . They say the king gives justice and protects the weak . She started to climb off the rock, awkwardly, but the ice had made it slippery and her foot went out from under her . Jon caught her before she could fall, and helped her safely down . The woman knelt on the icy ground . M ’ lord, I beg you—Blood, said Mance Rayder . I ’ d win in the end, yes, but you ’ d bleed me, and my people have bled enough.Aye, you did . You jumped down the mountain and killed Orell, and afore I could get my axe you had a knife at my throat . I thought you ’ d have me then, or kill me, or maybe both, but you never did . And when I told you the tale o ’ Bael the Bard and how he plucked the rose o ’ Winterfell, I thought you ’ d know to pluck me then for certain, but you didn ’ t . You know nothing, Jon Snow . She gave him a shy smile . You might be learning some, though.That ’ s the one with the broken battlement, no? Shattered stone in the yard below, and a lean to it like our noble king Robert after a long night ’ s drinking? I thought all those buildings had been abandoned.It was the biggest tree Jon Snow had ever seen, the trunk near eight feet wide, the branches spreading so far that the entire village was shaded beneath their canopy . The size did not disturb him so much as the face . . . the mouth especially, no simple carved slash, but a jagged hollow large enough to swallow a sheep.Jon notched a fire arrow to his bowstring, and Satin lit it from the torch . He stepped to the parapet, drew, aimed, loosed . Ribbons of flame trailed behind as the shaft sped downward and thudded into its target, crackling.I do, said Janos Slynt . I know them too well.It happened quickly . One mole fled and then another, and suddenly all the villagers were throwing down their weapons and abandoning the barricade . The brothers were too few to hold alone . Jon watched them try and form a line to fall back in order, but the Thenns washed over them with spear and axe, and then they were fleeing too . Dornish Dilly slipped and went down on his face, and a wildling planted a spear between his shoulder blades . Kegs, slow and short of breath, had almost reached the bottom step when a Thenn caught the end of his cloak and yanked him around . . . but a crossbow quarrel dropped the man before his axe could fall . Got him, Satin crowed, as Kegs staggered to the stair and began to crawl up the steps on hands and knees.Is that boy as big a fool as he seems? the Lord Commander asked when he ’ d gone . Fool, the raven complained . Mormont did not wait for Jon to answer . His lord father stands high in King Renly ’ s councils, and I had half a notion to dispatch him . . . no, best not . Renly is not like to heed a quaking fat boy . I ’ ll send Ser Arnell . He ’ s a deal steadier, and his mother was one of the green-apple Fossoways.Big enough for you? Snowflakes speckled Tormund ’ s broad face, melting in his hair and beard.I ’ m frightened . Satin ’ s face was a ghastly white.And me, said Jon Snow.Jon lied … loudly, as if that could make it true . [BOS] I am, my lord, And you? [EOS] Dareon gave him a look . The stewards are fine for the likes of you and me, Sam, but not for Lord Snow.North or south, singers always find a ready welcome, so Bael ate at Lord Stark ’ s own table, and played for the lord in his high seat until half the night was gone . The old songs he played, and new ones he ’ d made himself, and he played and sang so well that when he was done, the lord offered to let him name his own reward . ‘ All I ask is a flower, ’ Bael answered, ‘ the fairest flower that blooms in the gardens o ’ Winterfell . ’For a moment Jon was too frightened to move . Why would the Lord Commander want to see him? They had heard something about Benjen, he thought wildly, he was dead, the vision had come true . Is it my uncle? he blurted . Is he returned safe?He stepped to the edge of the precipice . Careful, he reminded himself, it is a long way down . Red Alyn sounded his sentry ’ s horn once more, Aaaaahoooooooooooooooooooooooooo, aaaaahoooooooooooooooooooo . And now the wildlings answered, not with one horn but with a dozen, and with drums and pipes as well . We are come, they seemed to say, we are come to break your Wall, to take your lands and steal your daughters . The wind howled, the trebuchets creaked and thumped, the barrels flew . Behind the giants and the mammoths, Jon saw men advancing on the Wall with bows and axes . Were there twenty or twenty thousand? In the dark there was no way to tell . This is a battle of blind men, but Mance has a few thousand more of them than we do.Jon stood tall . He told himself that he would die well; that much he could do, at the least . [BOS] I know the penalty for desertion, my lord . I ’ m not afraid to die . [EOS] Sam . Jon stood . What is it? Do you want to see the sword? If the others had known, no doubt Sam did too.He should eat, he decided . Food would settle his stomach and give Ghost the chance to catch up . There was no danger yet; Castle Black still slept . In his saddlebag, he found a biscuit, a piece of cheese, and a small withered brown apple . He ’ d brought salt beef as well, and a rasher of bacon he ’ d filched from the kitchens, but he would save the meat for the morrow . After it was gone he ’ d need to hunt, and that would slow him.Do you remember the words of your vow?A hunting horn echoed through the mountains, and a moment later Jon heard the baying of hounds . They will be with us soon, announced Qhorin . Keep your wolf in hand.They warned me bastard blood was craven, he heard Qhorin Halfhand say coldly behind him . I see it is so . Run to your new masters, coward.Jon followed the rest back to the armory, walking alone . He often walked alone here . There were almost twenty in the group he trained with, yet not one he could call a friend . Most were two or three years his senior, yet not one was half the fighter Robb had been at fourteen . Dareon was quick but afraid of being hit . Pyp used his sword like a dagger, Jeren was weak as a girl, Grenn slow and clumsy . Halder ’ s blows were brutally hard but he ran right into your attacks . The more time he spent with them, the more Jon despised them.It ’ s not, Mormont told him . Gods save us, boy, you ’ re not blind and you ’ re not stupid . When dead men come hunting in the night, do you think it matters who sits the Iron Throne?Mormont frowned . A dead man tried to kill me . How well could I be? He scratched under his chin . His shaggy grey beard had been singed in the fire, and he ’ d hacked it off . The pale stubble of his new whiskers made him look old, disreputable, and grumpy . You do not look well . How is your hand?Clydas and Maester Aemon rode the winch cage up to safety at the top of the Wall, and most of the Mole ’ s Town wives as well . Men in black cloaks paced restlessly on the tower tops and shouted back and forth across the courtyards . Septon Cellador led the men on the barricade in a prayer, beseeching the Warrior to give them strength . Deaf Dick Follard curled up beneath his cloak and went to sleep . Satin walked a hundred leagues in circles, round and round the crenellations . The Wall wept and the sun crept across a hard blue sky . Near evenfall, Owen the Oaf returned with a loaf of black bread and a pail of Hobb ’ s best mutton, cooked in a thick broth of ale and onions . Even Dick woke up for that . They ate every bit of it, using chunks of bread to wipe the bottom of the pail . By the time they were done the sun was low in the west, the shadows sharp and black throughout the castle . Jon told Satin, [BOS] Light the fire, and fill the kettle with oil . [EOS] Mules? The earless man frowned . Mules are slow.The mare whickered softly as Jon Snow tightened the cinch . Easy, sweet lady, he said in a soft voice, quieting her with a touch . Wind whispered through the stable, a cold dead breath on his face, but Jon paid it no mind . He strapped his roll to the saddle, his scarred fingers stiff and clumsy . Ghost, he called softly, to me . And the wolf was there, eyes like embers.As they led their horses back to the stable, Jon was uncomfortably aware that people were watching him . Ser Alliser Thorne was drilling his boys in the yard, but he broke off to stare at Jon, a faint half smile on his lips . One-armed Donal Noye stood in the door of the armory . The gods be with you, Snow, he called out.Jon ’ s throat was dry . [BOS] You know? [EOS] Aemon … Targaryen? Jon could scarcely believe it.I have no place, Jon wanted to say, I ’ m a bastard, I have no rights, no name, no mother, and now not even a father . The words would not come . I don ’ t know.Four that you ’ ve humiliated in the yard . Four who are probably afraid of you . I ’ ve watched you fight . It ’ s not training with you . Put a good edge on your sword, and they ’ d be dead meat; you know it, I know it, they know it . You leave them nothing . You shame them . Does that make you proud?Jon went to cut more branches, snapping each one in two before tossing it into the flames . The tree had been dead a long time, but it seemed to live again in the fire, as fiery dancers woke within each stick of wood to whirl and spin in their glowing gowns of yellow, red, and orange.Jon said, defiant . [BOS] Call them, You can ’ t stop me from seeing him . [EOS] He crossed the room, keeping the bed between them, and looked down on Bran where he lay.Might be you won ’ t like it much.They all do, said Jon . Ygritte said they opened a hundred graves . . . graves of kings and heroes, all over the valley of the Milkwater, but they never . . .The tall man gestured, and two of the others pulled Jon from the bed . With the lantern leading the way they marched him from his cell and up a half turn of stair, to the Old Bear ’ s solar . He saw Maester Aemon standing by the fire, his hands folded around the head of a blackthorn cane . Septon Cellador was half drunk as usual, and Ser Wynton Stout was asleep in a window seat . The other brothers were strangers to him . All but one.Jon blazed back . [BOS] I ’ m a better swordsman and a better rider than any of you, It ’ s not fair . [EOS] Lord Janos started sputtering again . This, this is an outrage . We ought to hang this boy . Yes! Hang him, I say, hang him for a turncloak and a warg, along with his friend Mance Rayder . Lord Commander? I will not have it, I will not suffer it!They went cautiously, moving as silent as man and horse could move, retracing their steps until they reached the mouth of a narrow defile where an icy little stream emerged from between two mountains . Jon remembered the place . They had watered the horses here before the sun went down.He walked to the Lord Commander ’ s Tower alone, with a curious sense of apprehension . The brothers on guard eyed him solemnly as he approached . The Old Bear ’ s in his solar, one of them announced . He was asking for you.The king poured himself as Dalla cut the well-crisped hens apart and brought them each a half . Jon peeled off his gloves and ate with his fingers, sucking every morsel of meat off the bones.I am not, Grenn said.It ’ s only the men from the Shadow Tower . It was growing harder to cling to the hope of Benjen Stark ’ s safe return . The cloak he had found beneath the Fist could well have belonged to his uncle or one of his men, even the Old Bear admitted as much, though why they would have buried it there, wrapped around the cache of dragonglass, no one could say . Sam, I have to go.Jon corrected . He was pleased by the dwarf ’ s comment, but he tried not to let it show . [BOS] Half brothers, [EOS] Jon used the crutch to limp across the tower top . The King ’ s Tower was not the castle ’ s tallest—the high, slim, crumbling Lance held that honor, though Othell Yarwyck had been heard to say it might topple any day . Nor was the King ’ s Tower strongest—the Tower of Guards beside the kingsroad would be a tougher nut to crack . But it was tall enough, strong enough, and well placed beside the Wall, overlooking the gate and the foot of the wooden stair.Jon remembered a spray of red blood on white snow, and the way Theon Greyjoy had kicked the dead man ’ s head . The man was a deserter . On the way back to Winterfell, Jon and Robb had raced, and found six direwolf pups in the snow . A thousand years ago.Jon pulled himself to his feet . Donal Noye stood glowering at them . The yard is for fighting, the armorer said . Keep your quarrels out of my armory, or I ’ ll make them my quarrels . You won ’ t like that.No, this was Aerys the First . The one Robert deposed was the second of that name.My father is no traitor, he told the direwolf when the rest had gone . Ghost looked at him in silence . Jon slumped against the wall, hands around his knees, and stared at the candle on the table beside his narrow bed . The flame flickered and swayed, the shadows moved around him, the room seemed to grow darker and colder . I will not sleep tonight, Jon thought.The armorer considered that a moment . Robert was the true steel . Stannis is pure iron, black and hard and strong, yes, but brittle, the way iron gets . He ’ ll break before he bends . And Renly, that one, he ’ s copper, bright and shiny, pretty to look at but not worth all that much at the end of the day.You can wield Longclaw despite the pain?The numbers would be greatly against us, Ser Ottyn had objected . Craster said he was gathering a great host . Many thousands . Without Qhorin, we are only two hundred.The Old Bear scratched at his chin . I had forgotten how much a new beard itches, he said . Well, no help for that . Is that hand of yours healed enough to resume your duties?Smallwood says Craster is a friend to the Watch.That ’ s not for me to say, my lord.Jon said . It wasn ’ t actually true yet, but it would be . [BOS] If I wasn ’ t here, he ’ d tear out your throat, [EOS] One was asleep, curled up tight and buried beneath a great mound of skins . Jon could see nothing of him but his hair, bright red in the firelight . The second sat close to the flames, feeding them twigs and branches and complaining of the wind in a querulous tone . The third watched the pass, though there was little to see, only a vast bowl of darkness ringed by the snowy shoulders of the mountains . It was the watcher who wore the horn.Jon sucked in his breath.We ’ re sending you, Lord Snow . Ser Alliser smiled.Yes, my lord.The look Mance gave Jon was grim and cold . What happened to your face?Jon Snow remembered the wight rising, its eyes shining blue in the pale dead face . He knew why, he was certain.The bearded man laughed so hard he sprayed bits of chicken everywhere . He rubbed the grease from his mouth with the back of a huge hand . A blind boy, must be . Who ever heard of a king without ears? Why, his crown would fall straight down to his neck! Har! He grinned at Jon, wiping his fingers clean on his breeches . Close your beak, crow . Spin yourself around, might be you ’ d find who you ’ re looking for.Builders, announced lantern-jawed Othell Yarwyck . Halder and Albett trailed out after him.Not always, came the silent shout . Not before the crow.Mormont leaned forward . Every village we have passed has been abandoned . Yours are the first living faces we ’ ve seen since we left the Wall . The people are gone . . . whether dead, fled, or taken, I could not say . The animals as well . Nothing is left . And earlier, we found the bodies of two of Ben Stark ’ s rangers only a few leagues from the Wall . They were pale and cold, with black hands and black feet and wounds that did not bleed . Yet when we took them back to Castle Black they rose in the night and killed . One slew Ser Jaremy Rykker and the other came for me, which tells me that they remember some of what they knew when they lived, but there was no human mercy left in them.Cold, but the rain has stopped.Jon found parchment, quill, and ink in his saddlebag and brought them to the Lord Commander . At Whitetree, Mormont scrawled . The fourth village . All empty . The wildlings are gone . Find Tarly and see that he gets this on its way, he said as he handed Jon the message . When he whistled, his raven came flapping down to land on his horse ’ s head . Corn, the raven suggested, bobbing . The horse whickered.Do you know anything of my uncle, Benjen Stark?Pyp grinned . The Night ’ s Watch is thousands of years old, he said, but I ’ ll wager Lord Snow ’ s the first brother ever honored for burning down the Lord Commander ’ s Tower.The Halfhand helped himself to an egg and cracked it on the edge of the bowl . These kings will do what they will, he said, peeling away the shell . Likely it will be little enough . The best hope is Winterfell . The Starks must rally the north.Septa Mordane, Jon told her . I don ’ t think she ’ d like Nymeria helping, either . The she-wolf regarded him silently with her dark golden eyes . It ’ s just as well . I have something for you to take with you, and it has to be packed very carefully.Jon said, smiling . [BOS] You ’ ll do well at that, [EOS] That ’ s a woman for you . One day she ’ s kissing you, the next she ’ s filling you with arrows.So are they . Jon leaned his crutch up against a merlon and took up his longbow, bending the smooth thick Dornish yew to slip a bowstring through the notches . Don ’ t waste a quarrel unless you know you have a good clean shot, he said when Satin returned from waking Dick . We have an ample supply up here, but ample doesn ’ t mean inexhaustible . And step behind a merlon to reload, don ’ t try and hide in back of a scarecrow . They ’ re made of straw, an arrow will punch through them . He did not bother telling Dick Follard anything . Dick could read your lips if there was enough light and he gave a damn what you were saying, but he knew it all already.A maid, she teased . You were a maid.Tormund Thunderfist cracked a gap-toothed smile . He asked me if that was my daughter riding there beside me, with her smooth pink cheeks . The wildling shook snow from his arm and turned his horse about . It may be he never saw a man without a beard before . Come, we start back . Mance grows sore wroth when I ’ m not found in my accustomed place.A ragged cheer went up . Zei grabbed Owen by the hands, spun him around in a circle, and gave him a long wet kiss right there for all to see . She tried to kiss Jon too, but he held her by the shoulder and pushed her gently but firmly away . No, he said . I am done with kissing . Suddenly he was too weary to stand, and his leg was agony from knee to groin . He fumbled for his crutch . Pyp, help me to the cage . Grenn, you have the Wall.Three hours, my lord.Ho, said Pyp . Listen to the crow call the raven black . You ’ re certain to be a ranger, Toad . They ’ ll want you as far from the castle as they can . If Mance Rayder attacks, lift your visor and show your face, and he ’ ll run off screaming.Jon said . [BOS] These two are Grenn and Pypar, [EOS] The old man seemed to sense his doubts . Tell me, Jon, if the day should ever come when your lord father must needs choose between honor on the one hand and those he loves on the other, what would he do?Slow, but more surefooted on the ice . The patrols often ride atop the Wall, and aside from Castle Black, the paths up there have not been graveled for long years . The mules are bred at Eastwatch, and specially trained to their duty.Toad sat on the floor, gingerly feeling the back of his head . His fingers came away bloody . He tried to kill me.Aye? Some great lord was he, this Donal Noye? One of your shiny knights in their steel smallclothes?The message made no mention of Lord Eddard or the girls . He gave an irritated shrug . Perhaps they never got my letter . Aemon sent two copies, with his best birds, but who can say? More like, Pycelle did not deign to reply . It would not be the first time, nor the last . I fear we count for less than nothing in King ’ s Landing . They tell us what they want us to know, and that ’ s little enough.I never did, but see you don ’ t go spreading that about . Tormund Giantsbane has a better ring to it than Tormund Giantsbabe, and that ’ s the honest truth o ’ it.Thoren said, Are you too lazy to climb a hill, boy?The Magnar said something in the Old Tongue . He might have been telling the Thenns to kill Jon where he stood, but he would never know the truth of that . Lightning crashed down from the sky, a searing blue-white bolt that touched the top of the tower in the lake . They could smell the fury of it, and when the thunder came it seemed to shake the night.Do you know ‘ The Last of the Giants ’? Without waiting for an answer Ygritte said, You need a deeper voice than mine to do it proper . Then she sang, Ooooooh, I am the last of the giants, my people are gone from the earth.You can ’ t hear yourself fart.Afterward it would seem to Jon Snow as if he ’ d dreamt that night . Side by side with the straw soldiers, with longbows or crossbows clutched in half-frozen hands, his archers launched a hundred flights of arrows against men they never saw . From time to time a wildling arrow came flying back in answer . He sent men to the smaller catapults and filled the air with jagged rocks the size of a giant ’ s fist, but the darkness swallowed them as a man might swallow a handful of nuts . Mammoths trumpeted in the gloom, strange voices called out in stranger tongues, and Septon Cellador prayed so loudly and drunkenly for the dawn to come that Jon was tempted to chuck him over the edge himself . They heard a mammoth dying at their feet and saw another lurch burning through the woods, trampling down men and trees alike . The wind blew cold and colder . Hobb rode up the chain with cups of onion broth, and Owen and Clydas served them to the archers where they stood, so they could gulp them down between arrows . Zei took a place among them with her crossbow . Hours of repeated jars and shocks knocked something loose on the right-hand trebuchet, and its counterweight came crashing free, suddenly and catastrophically, wrenching the throwing arm sideways with a splintering crash . The left-hand trebuchet kept throwing, but the wildlings had quickly learned to shun the place where its loads were landing.I am sorry to have woken you, Maester, Jon Snow said.The Wall was too big to be stormed by any conventional means; too high for ladders or siege towers, too thick for battering rams . No catapult could throw a stone large enough to breach it, and if you tried to set it on fire, the icemelt would quench the flames . You could climb over, as the raiders did near Greyguard, but only if you were strong and fit and sure-handed, and even then you might end up like Jarl, impaled on a tree . They must take the gate, or they cannot pass.Jon twisted like an eel and slammed a heel down across the instep of the boy holding him . There was a sudden cry of pain, and he was free . He flew at Toad, knocked him backward over a bench, and landed on his chest with both hands on his throat, slamming his head against the packed earth.Keep on the way you were . If you come on Ser Ottyn ’ s pavilion, you ’ ve gone too far . Giant smiled . Unless Sam ’ s found him a tree too . What a tree that would be.The raven flapped down and landed on the table, strutting toward the sword, head cocked curiously . Jon hesitated . He had no inkling what this meant . My lord?Treat? Tormund laughed . Now there ’ s a word . Har! Mance wants to talk, that ’ s true enough . Can ’ t say he ’ d want to talk with you, though.Jon kicked his mare, spinning her in a circle . The boys were all around him now, closing from every side.Jon remembered dead Othor and his cold black hands . [BOS] Maybe we should do as she says . [EOS] —did not prevent him from fathering a bastard . Did it?Burn them, someone whispered . One of the rangers; Jon could not have said who . Yes, burn them, a second voice urged.They kept their pledge . When Aegon slew Black Harren and claimed his kingdom, Harren ’ s brother was Lord Commander on the Wall, with ten thousand swords to hand . He did not march . In the days when the Seven Kingdoms were seven kingdoms, not a generation passed that three or four of them were not at war . The Watch took no part . When the Andals crossed the narrow sea and swept away the kingdoms of the First Men, the sons of the fallen kings held true to their vows and remained at their posts . So it has always been, for years beyond counting . Such is the price of honor.By the time the telling was done, it was dark outside and Sam was licking his fingers . That was good, but now I ’ d like a leg of lamb . A whole leg, just for me, sauced with mint and honey and cloves . Did you see any lambs?They found Jarl in a tree, impaled upon a splintered branch and still roped to the three men who lay broken beneath him . One was still alive, but his legs and spine were shattered, and most of his ribs as well . Mercy, he said when they came upon him . One of the Thenns smashed his head in with a big stone mace . The Magnar gave orders, and his men began to gather fuel for a pyre.So now you claim the great Qhorin Halfhand feared this creature? Slynt looked at Rattleshirt, and snorted.Jon Snow ’ s garron whickered softly, but a touch and a soft word soon quieted the animal . Would that his own fears could be calmed so easily . He was all in black, the black of the Night ’ s Watch, but the enemy rode before and behind . Wildlings, and I am with them . Ygritte wore the cloak of Qhorin Halfhand . Lenyl had his hauberk, the big spearwife Ragwyle his gloves, one of the bowmen his boots . Qhorin ’ s helm had been won by the short homely man called Longspear Ryk, but it fit poorly on his narrow head, so he ’ d given that to Ygritte as well . And Rattleshirt had Qhorin ’ s bones in his bag, along with the bloody head of Ebben, who set out with Jon to scout the Skirling Pass . Dead, all dead but me, and I am dead to the world.When the dreams took him, he found himself back home once more, splashing in the hot pools beneath a huge white weirwood that had his father ’ s face . Ygritte was with him, laughing at him, shedding her skins till she was naked as her name day, trying to kiss him, but he couldn ’ t, not with his father watching . He was the blood of Winterfell, a man of the Night ’ s Watch . I will not father a bastard, he told her . I will not . I will not . You know nothing, Jon Snow, she whispered, her skin dissolving in the hot water, the flesh beneath sloughing off her bones until only skull and skeleton remained, and the pool bubbled thick and red.I took her prisoner.Jon opened a shuttered window, took the flagon of beer off the outside ledge, and filled a horn . Hobb had given him a lemon, still cold from the Wall . Jon crushed it in his fist . The juice trickled through his fingers . Mormont drank lemon in his beer every day, and claimed that was why he still had his own teeth.Where? I didn ’ t hear anything . The horses stopped.They found Stannis Baratheon standing alone at the edge of the Wall, brooding over the field where he had won his battle, and the great green forest beyond . He was dressed in the same black breeches, tunic, and boots that a brother of the Night ’ s Watch might wear . Only his cloak set him apart; a heavy golden cloak trimmed in black fur, and pinned with a brooch in the shape of a flaming heart . I have brought you the Bastard of Winterfell, Your Grace, said Melisandre.They glimpsed the eagle twice more the day after, and heard the hunting horn behind them echoing against the mountains . Each time it seemed a little louder, a little closer . When night fell, the Halfhand told Ebben to take the squire ’ s garron as well as his own, and ride east for Mormont with all haste, back the way they had come . The rest of them would draw off the pursuit . Send Jon, Ebben had urged . He can ride as fast as me.The Giant ’ s Stair might serve, said Ser Mallador Locke, or the Skirling Pass, if it ’ s clear.A quarter way around the Fist he chased the wolf before he lost him again . Finally he stopped to catch his breath amidst the scrub, thorns, and tumbled rocks at the base of the hill . Beyond the torchlight, the dark pressed close.The Old Bear snorted . Good . Now go put on your sword.Ghost, stay, he commanded . The door to Craster ’ s Keep was made of two flaps of deerhide . Jon shoved between them, stooping to pass under the low lintel . Two dozen of the chief rangers had preceded him, and were standing around the firepit in the center of the dirt floor while puddles collected about their boots . The hall stank of soot, dung, and wet dog . The air was heavy with smoke, yet somehow still damp . Rain leaked through the smoke hole in the roof . It was all a single room, with a sleeping loft above reached by a pair of splintery ladders.. . . he ’ s dead? Mormont asked, not unkindly.And if I refuse?Jon shook off Pyp ’ s hand . [BOS] Halder, enough . [EOS] Jon could have told him . He knew, they all knew, yet no man of them would say the words . The Others are only a story, a tale to make children shiver . If they ever lived at all, they are gone eight thousand years . Even the thought made him feel foolish; he was a man grown now, a black brother of the Night ’ s Watch, not the boy who ’ d once sat at Old Nan ’ s feet with Bran and Robb and Arya.Do you think your brother ’ s war is more important than ours? the old man barked.Ygritte said you never found the horn.We all knew him . His voice was sad.Jon let out a deep sigh . [BOS] You have the right of it . I was acting the boy . [EOS] —a whore . I heard him . What of it?It was a grim gallop . They rode two miles down the column through swirling snows, then cut through a tangle of baggage wayns to splash across the Milkwater where it took a great loop toward the east . A crust of thin ice covered the river shallows; with every step their horses ’ hooves crashed through, until they reached the deeper water ten yards out . The snow seemed be falling even faster on the eastern bank, and the drifts were deeper too . Even the wind is colder . And night was falling too.Jon smiled . [BOS] Lord Rowan of Goldengrove found him in bed with his daughter . The girl was two years older, and Dareon swears she helped him through her window, but under her father ’ s eye she named it rape, so here he is . When Maester Aemon heard him sing, he said his voice was honey poured over thunder . Toad sometimes sings too, if you call it singing . Drinking songs he learned in his father ’ s winesink . Pyp says his voice is piss poured over a fart . [EOS] They laughed at that together.Jon admitted . [BOS] If the rangers must stay in sight of the Fist, I don ’ t see how they can hope to find my uncle, [EOS] For myself, my lord?Jon had never liked Theon Greyjoy, but he had been their father ’ s ward . Another spasm of pain twisted up his leg, and the next he knew he was flat on his back again . There ’ s some mistake, he insisted . At Queenscrown I saw a direwolf, a grey direwolf . . . grey . . . it knew me . If Bran was dead, could some part of him live on in his wolf, as Orell lived within his eagle?You know nothing, Jon Snow . It went on and on and on . There are hundreds o ’ caves in these hills, and down deep they all connect . There ’ s even a way under your Wall . Gorne ’ s Way.What, even me? said Tormund.Talking with Sam, he said.Ygritte wanted me to be a wildling . Stannis wants me to be the Lord of Winterfell . But what do I want? The sun crept down the sky to dip behind the Wall where it curved through the western hills . Jon watched as that towering expanse of ice took on the reds and pinks of sunset . Would I sooner be hanged for a turncloak by Lord Janos, or forswear my vows, marry Val, and become the Lord of Winterfell? It seemed an easy choice when he thought of it in those terms . . . though if Ygritte had still been alive, it might have been even easier . Val was a stranger to him . She was not hard on the eyes, certainly, and she had been sister to Mance Rayder ’ s queen, but still . . .Jon insisted . How could they think his father was a traitor, had they all gone mad? Lord Eddard Stark would never dishonor himself … would he? [BOS] But it ’ s a lie, [EOS] There was no call to scare the girl, he told them.Go on, then, the guard said . Be quick about it . Huddled beneath his black cloak, with his hood drawn up against the wind, the man never even looked to see if he had a bucket.Maester Aemon was not long in coming . He moved slowly, one spotted hand on Clydas ’ s arm as he shuffled forward with small careful steps . Around his thin neck his chain hung heavy, gold and silver links glinting amongst iron, lead, tin, and other base metals . Jon Snow, he said, you must tell me all you ’ ve seen and done when you are stronger . Donal, put a kettle of wine on the fire, and my irons as well . I will want them red-hot . Clydas, I shall need that good sharp knife of yours . The maester was more than a hundred years old; shrunken, frail, hairless, and quite blind . But if his milky eyes saw nothing, his wits were still as sharp as they had ever been.We crossed a brook at the foot of the hill.You knew?Outside, everything was noise and confusion . Wagons were being loaded, men were shouting, horses were being harnessed and saddled and led from the stables . A light snow had begun to fall, and everyone was in an uproar to be off.As you wish, Bowen Marsh responded.The round fat face looked up at him, suspicious . Why? What will we do outside?It can ’ t, his uncle told him . That is the point . The Night ’ s Watch is pledged to take no part in the quarrels of the realm . Yet over the centuries certain Lords Commander, more proud than wise, forgot their vows and near destroyed us all with their ambitions . Lord Commander Runcel Hightower tried to bequeathe the Watch to his bastard son . Lord Commander Rodrik Flint thought to make himself King-beyond-the-Wall . Tristan Mudd, Mad Marq Rankenfell, Robin Hill . . . did you know that six hundred years ago, the commanders at Snowgate and the Nightfort went to war against each other? And when the Lord Commander tried to stop them, they joined forces to murder him? The Stark in Winterfell had to take a hand . . . and both their heads . Which he did easily, because their strongholds were not defensible . The Night ’ s Watch had nine hundred and ninety-six Lords Commander before Jeor Mormont, most of them men of courage and honor . . . but we have had cowards and fools as well, our tyrants and our madmen . We survive because the lords and kings of the Seven Kingdoms know that we pose no threat to them, no matter who should lead us . Our only foes are to the north, and to the north we have the Wall.Sleep came at last, and with it nightmares . He dreamed of burning castles and dead men rising unquiet from their graves . It was still dark when Qhorin woke him . While the Halfhand slept, Jon sat with his back to the cave wall, listening to the water and waiting for the dawn.Jon was taken aback . It was true, Lord Eddard had often made Robb part of his councils back at Winterfell . Could Sam be right? Even a bastard could rise high in the Night ’ s Watch, they said . [BOS] I never asked for this, [EOS] he said stubbornly.It was not Lord Eddard ’ s face he saw floating before him, though; it was Lady Catelyn ’ s . With her deep blue eyes and hard cold mouth, she looked a bit like Stannis . Iron, he thought, but brittle . She was looking at him the way she used to look at him at Winterfell, whenever he had bested Robb at swords or sums or most anything . Who are you? that look had always seemed to say . This is not your place . Why are you here?That ’ s true enough, Benjen said with a downward twist of his mouth . He took Jon ’ s cup from the table, filled it fresh from a nearby pitcher, and drank down a long swallow.Rattleshirt, Qhorin called down, icy-polite.Mormont made no answer.No, my lord, Sam replied in a thin, nervous voice . The high officers frightened him, Jon knew, the Old Bear most of all . I was named in the light of the Seven at the sept on Horn Hill, as my father was, and his father, and all the Tarlys for a thousand years.You think you had it hard, being a high lord ’ s bastard? the armorer went on . That boy Jeren is a septon ’ s get, and Cotter Pyke is the baseborn son of a tavern wench . Now he commands Eastwatch by the Sea.Nor you?Aye, Ygritte agreed . It always is.Tormund Giantsbane seemed to me the sort of man who would make a good friend and a bad enemy, Your Grace.All the rangers, Mormont repeated . You think I ought to stop him . Kill him if need be . The Old Bear sighed . Were it only that he wished to rid himself of some mouths, I ’ d gladly send Yoren or Conwys to collect the boys . We could raise them to the black and the Watch would be that much the stronger . But the wildlings serve crueler gods than you or I . These boys are Craster ’ s offerings . His prayers, if you will.What ’ s in the Frostfangs that your king could want? You can ’ t stay here, there ’ s no food.Jon was in no mood for anyone ’ s counsel . [BOS] What do you know about being a bastard? [EOS] It was a fine brave boast, but it rang hollow . Jon glanced back to make certain the Magnar was not in earshot . Errok, Big Boil, and Hempen Dan were walking a few yards behind them, but paying no attention . Big Boil was complaining of his arse . Ygritte, he said in a low voice, Mance cannot win this war.Beauty can be treacherous . My brother learned that lesson from Cersei Lannister . She murdered him, do not doubt it . Your father and Jon Arryn as well . He scowled . You rode with these wildlings . Is there any honor in them, do you think?Rangers with me, Ser Jaremy Rykker called when they were gone . Pyp was staring at Jon as he got slowly to his feet . His ears were red . Grenn, grinning broadly, did not seem to realize that anything was amiss . Matt and Toad fell in beside them, and they followed Ser Jaremy from the sept.Jon called . The direwolf returned reluctantly to his side, tail held stiffly behind him . [BOS] Ghost, to me, [EOS] It happened twice more that night, and again in the morning, when she woke to find him hard . The wildlings were stirring by then, and several could not help but notice what was going on beneath the pile of furs . Jarl told them to be quick about it, before he had to throw a pail of water over them . Like a pair of rutting dogs, Jon thought afterward . Was that what he ’ d become? I am a man of the Night ’ s Watch, a small voice inside insisted, but every night it seemed a little fainter, and when Ygritte kissed his ears or bit his neck, he could not hear it at all . Was this how it was for my father? he wondered . Was he as weak as I am, when he dishonored himself in my mother ’ s bed?Jon took another swallow of mead . There is only one tale that he might believe . [BOS] You say you were at Winterfell, the night my father feasted King Robert . [EOS] A half dozen of his friends were lurking outside when he left the King ’ s Tower, where Lord Commander Mormont now made his residence . They ’ d hung a target on the granary doors, so they could seem to be honing their skills as archers, but he knew lurkers when he saw them . No sooner did he emerge than Pyp called out, Well, come about, let ’ s have a look.Jon was hungry too, so he fell in beside Lannister and slowed his pace to match the dwarf ’ s awkward, waddling steps . The wind was rising, and they could hear the old wooden buildings creaking around them, and in the distance a heavy shutter banging, over and over, forgotten . Once there was a muffled thump as a blanket of snow slid from a roof and landed near them.Jon was shocked to see the shine of tears in the old man ’ s eyes . [BOS] Who are you? [EOS] he asked quietly, almost in dread.The morning sky was streaked by thin grey clouds, but the pale red line was there behind them . The black brothers had dubbed the wanderer Mormont ’ s Torch, saying (only half in jest) that the gods must have sent it to light the old man ’ s way through the haunted forest.Sam glanced about anxiously . Is it time to go? I shouldn ’ t be late, they might change their minds . He was fairly bouncing as they crossed the weed-strewn courtyard . The day was warm and sunny . Rivulets of water trickled down the sides of the Wall, so the ice seemed to sparkle and shine.And then they were running . Jon made no effort to guide the horse . It was all he could do to stay on her as they plunged through mud and rain and thunder . Wet grass whipped at his face and a spear flew past his ear . If the horse stumbles and breaks a leg, they will run me down and kill me, he thought, but the old gods were with him and the horse did not stumble . Lightning shivered through the black dome of sky, and thunder rolled across the plains . The shouts dwindled and died behind him.… and all the nights to come, finished Pyp . He reached over for Jon ’ s reins . So here are your choices . Kill me, or come back with me.in stone halls they forge their sharp spears.As you say, Your—Mance.Jon told him, as Clydas ran a blade up the leg of his breeches, slicing the heavy black cloth, crusty with old blood and sodden with new . [BOS] There are wildlings coming, From the south . We climbed the Wall . . . [EOS] Ser Denys Mallister was more courteous . It was a hard thing young Samwell asked of me, the old knight confessed . When Lord Qorgyle was chosen, I told myself, ‘ No matter, he has been longer on the Wall than you have, your time will come . ’ When it was Lord Mormont, I thought, ‘ He is strong and fierce, but he is old, your time may yet come . ’ But you are half a boy, Lord Snow, and now I must return to the Shadow Tower knowing that my time will never come . He smiled a tired smile . Do not make me die regretful . Your uncle was a great man . Your lord father and his father as well . I shall expect full as much of you.Yes, Jon thought . No, he said . The Magnar . . .You girls do as you please, Rast said, but if Thorne sends me against Lady Piggy, I ’ m going to slice me off a rasher of bacon . He laughed in Jon ’ s face and left them there.Tyrion Lannister laid a hand on his arm . Jon, he said . I am truly sorry.In Mance Rayder?He yielded, Ygritte reminded them.Did my uncle know?NO! Grenn shouted.A free woman rides where she will, Ygritte said.Your brother was the rightful Lord of Winterfell . If he had stayed home and done his duty, instead of crowning himself and riding off to conquer the riverlands, he might be alive today . Be that as it may . You are not Robb, no more than I am Robert.Supper, screamed the raven . Supper, supper.A brother of the Night ’ s Watch shouldn ’ t be so scared.My lord is wise . Ser Alliser seized Jon by the arm.Maester Aemon paused, washcloth in hand . The Horn of Winter is an ancient legend . Does the King-beyond-the-Wall truly believe that such a thing exists?Yet he must have dozed . When he woke, his legs were stiff and cramped and the candle had long since burned out . Ghost stood on his hind legs, scrabbling at the door . Jon was startled to see how tall he ’ d grown . Ghost, what is it? he called softly . The direwolf turned his head and looked down at him, baring his fangs in a silent snarl . Has he gone mad? Jon wondered . It ’ s me, Ghost, he murmured, trying not to sound afraid . Yet he was trembling, violently . When had it gotten so cold?The lad ’ s a warg, or close enough, put in Ragwyle, the big spearwife . His wolf took a piece o ’ Halfhand ’ s leg.The Wall is seven hundred feet high, and so thick at the base that it would take a hundred men a year to cut through it with picks and axes.It has been close on half a year since Benjen left us, my lord, Ser Jaremy went on . The forest is vast . The Wildlings might have fallen on him anywhere . I ’ d wager these two were the last survivors of his party, on their way back to us … but the enemy caught them before they could reach the safety of the Wall . The corpses are still fresh, these men cannot have been dead more than a day …Do we have to bind your hands, or will you give us your word you ’ ll ride back peaceful? asked Halder.The yard was quiet and empty . A lone sentry stood high on the battlements of the inner wall, his cloak pulled tight around him against the cold . He looked bored and miserable as he huddled there alone, but Jon would have traded places with him in an instant . Otherwise the castle was dark and deserted . Jon had seen an abandoned holdfast once, a drear place where nothing moved but the wind and the stones kept silent about whatever people had lived there . Winterfell reminded him of that tonight.Are all crows so curious? asked Tormund . Well, here ’ s a tale for you . It were another winter, colder even than the one I spent inside that giant, and snowing day and night, snowflakes as big as your head, not these little things . It snowed so hard the whole village was half buried . I was in me Ruddy Hall, with only a cask o ’ mead to keep me company and nothing to do but drink it . The more I drank the more I got to thinking about this woman lived close by, a fine strong woman with the biggest pair of teats you ever saw . She had a temper on her, that one, but oh, she could be warm too, and in the deep of winter a man needs his warmth.The wolf had something in his jaws . Something black . What ’ s he got there? asked Bowen Marsh, frowning.Cumbersome and slow-moving, the turtle made for an easy shot, and his archers and crossbowmen soon turned it into a lumbering wooden hedgehog . . . but the wet hides protected it, just as they had the mantlets, and the flaming arrows guttered out almost as soon as they struck . Jon cursed under his breath . Scorpions, he commanded . Catapults.Whatever pride his lord father might have felt at Samwell ’ s birth vanished as the boy grew up plump, soft, and awkward . Sam loved to listen to music and make his own songs, to wear soft velvets, to play in the castle kitchen beside the cooks, drinking in the rich smells as he snitched lemon cakes and blueberry tarts . His passions were books and kittens and dancing, clumsy as he was . But he grew ill at the sight of blood, and wept to see even a chicken slaughtered . A dozen masters-at-arms came and went at Horn Hill, trying to turn Samwell into the knight his father wanted . The boy was cursed and caned, slapped and starved . One man had him sleep in his chainmail to make him more martial . Another dressed him in his mother ’ s clothing and paraded him through the bailey to shame him into valor . He only grew fatter and more frightened, until Lord Randyll ’ s disappointment turned to anger and then to loathing . One time, Sam confided, his voice dropping from a whisper, two men came to the castle, warlocks from Qarth with white skin and blue lips . They slaughtered a bull aurochs and made me bathe in the hot blood, but it didn ’ t make me brave as they ’ d promised . I got sick and retched . Father had them scourged.Jon confessed . [BOS] It ’ s all true, As far as it goes . [EOS] Jon tried to sit again . It was as much a mistake as the first time . He cried out, cursing.Yes, but where?Your lord father sent you to us, Jon . Why, who can say?and he smiled and he laughed and he sung,Jon wondered . [BOS] Who cares how much pickled cod they ate six hundred years ago? [EOS] Even then the captive did not speak . Mercy, he might have said, or You have taken my horse, my coin, my food, let me keep my life, or No, please, I have done you no harm . He might have said a thousand things, or wept, or called upon his gods . No words would save him now, though . Perhaps he knew that . So he held his tongue, and looked at Jon in accusation and appeal.Last night . Conwy and his charges had brought the news north with them, and the talk in the common room had been of little else . Jon was still not certain how he felt about it . Robb a king? The brother he ’ d played with, fought with, shared his first cup of wine with? But not mother ’ s milk, no . So now Robb will sip summerwine from jeweled goblets, while I ’ m kneeling beside some stream sucking snowmelt from cupped hands . Robb will make a good king, he said loyally.He was finishing the last of the pork pie the cooks had served up for supper when Jon sat down across from him . The fat boy ’ s eyes widened at the sight of Ghost . Is that a wolf?Within the rock, the passage descended twenty feet before it opened out onto a space as large as Winterfell ’ s Great Hall . Cookfires burned amongst the columns, their smoke rising to blacken the stony ceiling . The horses had been hobbled along one wall, beside a shallow pool . A sinkhole in the center of the floor opened on what might have been an even greater cavern below, though the darkness made it hard to tell . Jon could hear the soft rushing sound of an underground stream somewhere below as well.If we return . . .You rode with these wildlings, said Thorne . Mance Rayder knows you . He will be more inclined to trust you.Jon insisted . [BOS] I never said that, [EOS] Jon did not remember standing or leaving the solar . The next he knew, he was descending the tower steps, thinking, This is my father, my sisters, how can it be none of my concern.Jon turned away, and went inside the tent.Thorne strode toward him, crisp black leathers whispering faintly as he moved . He was a compact man of fifty years, spare and hard, with grey in his black hair and eyes like chips of onyx . The truth now, he commanded.The maester touched his brow . I am so very sorry, Jon . Your brothers died at the command of Theon Greyjoy, after he took Winterfell in his father ’ s name . When your father ’ s bannermen threatened to retake it, he put the castle to the torch.If he must be alone, he would make solitude his armor . Castle Black had no godswood, only a small sept and a drunken septon, but Jon could not find it in him to pray to any gods, old or new . If they were real, he thought, they were as cruel and implacable as winter.The weirwoods were beyond the Wall, yet he knew Sam meant what he said . They are my brothers, he thought . As much as Robb and Bran and Rickon …The wildlings had built their watchfire in a shallow depression above the narrowest part of the pass, with a sheer drop below and rock behind to shelter them from the worst of the wind . That same windbreak allowed the black brothers to crawl within a few feet of them, creeping along on their bellies until they were looking down on the men they must kill.So slow, the Magnar complained loudly, as he watched them edge their way upward . Has he forgotten the crows? He should climb faster, afore we are discovered.Do you think I want to spend the rest of my life washing an old man ’ s smallclothes?A crust of frozen blood crunched beneath the heel of his boot . The wildlings were stripping the dead horses of every scrap of steel and leather, even prying the horseshoes off their hooves . A few were going through packs they ’ d turned up, looking for weapons and food . Jon passed one of Chett ’ s dogs, or what remained of him, lying in a sludgy pool of half-frozen blood.That sounds more like me, said Tormund . Well met, Jon Snow . I am fond o ’ wargs, as it happens, though not o ’ Starks.Yet it would be an ill day for us if Craster died . Your uncle could tell you of the times Craster ’ s Keep made the difference between life and death for our rangers.Inside was more, and worse . Jon had never seen pink snow before . The wind gusted around him, pulling at his heavy sheepskin cloak . Ravens flapped from one dead horse to the next . Are those wild ravens, or our own? Jon could not tell . He wondered where poor Sam was now . And what he was.They often ride atop the Wall? Not always?Did he? Mormont did not seem pleased . Craster said much and more last night, and confirmed enough of my fears to condemn me to a sleepless night on his floor . Mance Rayder is gathering his people together in the Frostfangs . That ’ s why the villages are empty . It is the same tale that Ser Denys Mallister had from the wildling his men captured in the Gorge, but Craster has added the where, and that makes all the difference.Stonesnake warmed his hands over the fire . What waits beyond the pass?Maester Aemon turned his head and looked at him with those dead white eyes . It was as if he were seeing right into his heart . Jon felt naked and exposed . He took the bucket in both hands and flung the rest of the slops through the bars . Strings of meat and blood flew everywhere, scattering the ravens . They took to the air, shrieking wildly . The quicker birds snatched morsels on the wing and gulped them down greedily . Jon let the empty bucket clang to the floor.He hoped Sam was holding up, back down the column . He was not a good rider even in fair weather, and six days of rain had made the ground treacherous, all soft mud and hidden rocks . When the wind blew, it drove the water right into their eyes . The Wall would be flowing off to the south, the melting ice mingling with warm rain to wash down in sheets and rivers . Pyp and Toad would be sitting near the fire in the common room, drinking cups of mulled wine before their supper . Jon envied them . His wet wool clung to him sodden and itching, his neck and shoulders ached fiercely from the weight of mail and sword, and he was sick of salt cod, salt beef, and hard cheese.Dywen did . Giant, Dolorous Edd, Sweet Donnel Hill, Ulmer, Left Hand Lew, Garth Greyfeather . Four or five more . Me.Longspear ’ s not your brother.My lord, what will happen to him? Will they kill him?Your rangers will limit their ranging to this side of the river until the Halfhand reaches us . After that, we ’ ll see . I will not lose more of my men.Jon nodded, not trusting himself to speak.The ranger gave his horse into the care of one of his men and followed . You are Jon Snow . You have your father ’ s look.When Lord Mormont said, We ’ re not like to find another place as strong . We ’ ll carry water, and make certain we are well supplied, Jon knew better than to argue . So the command was given, and the brothers of the Night ’ s Watch raised their camp behind the stone ring the First Men had made . Black tents sprouted like mushrooms after a rain, and blankets and bedrolls covered the bare ground . Stewards tethered the garrons in long lines, and saw them fed and watered . Foresters took their axes to the trees in the waning afternoon light to harvest enough wood to see them through the night . A score of builders set to clearing brush, digging latrines, and untying their bundles of fire-hardened stakes . I will have every opening in the ringwall ditched and staked before dark, the Old Bear had commanded.There ’ s a truer song than the one you sang in my tent . Mance looked to Harma Dogshead . How many horses have we found?They ’ re yours . Jon had hardly tasted Hobb ’ s great feast . I could not eat another bite . He took his cloak from its hook near the door and shouldered his way out.Jon heard a rustling from the red leaves above . Two branches parted, and he glimpsed a little man moving from limb to limb as easily as a squirrel . Bedwyck stood no more than five feet tall, but the grey streaks in his hair showed his age . The other rangers called him Giant . He sat in a fork of the tree over their heads and said, [BOS] There ’ s water to the north . A lake, might be . A few flint hills rising to the west, not very high . Nothing else to see, my lords . [EOS] His lord father had once talked about raising new lords and settling them in the abandoned holdfasts as a shield against wildlings . The plan would have required the Watch to yield back a large part of the Gift, but his uncle Benjen believed the Lord Commander could be won around, so long as the new lordlings paid taxes to Castle Black rather than Winterfell . It is a dream for spring, though, Lord Eddard had said . Even the promise of land will not lure men north with a winter coming on.Uncle Benjen is looking for you, he told Jon . He wanted to be gone an hour ago.And suddenly Ghost was back, stalking softly between two weirwoods . White fur and red eyes, Jon realized, disquieted . Like the trees …Jon said . Ghost ’ s head lifted . He seemed to taste the air . In the blink of an eye he was off, racing across the broad, weed-choked field to vanish in the trees . [BOS] Yes, my lord, [EOS] His body had played the part eagerly enough . His lips on hers, his hand sliding under her doeskin shirt to find a breast, his manhood stiffening when she rubbed her mound against it through their clothes . My vows, he ’ d thought, remembering the weirwood grove where he had said them, the nine great white trees in a circle, the carved red faces watching, listening . But her fingers were undoing his laces and her tongue was in his mouth and her hand slipped inside his smallclothes and brought him out, and he could not see the weirwoods anymore, only her . She bit his neck and he nuzzled hers, burying his nose in her thick red hair . Lucky, he thought, she is lucky, fire-kissed . Isn ’ t that good? she whispered as she guided him inside her . She was sopping wet down there, and no maiden, that was plain, but Jon did not care . His vows, her maidenhood, none of it mattered, only the heat of her, the mouth on his, the finger that pinched at his nipple . Isn ’ t that sweet? she said again . Not so fast, oh, slow, yes, like that . There now, there now, yes, sweet, sweet . You know nothing, Jon Snow, but I can show you . Harder now . Yessss.The Old Bear rolled up the paper . Your firsts will instruct you in your duties . May all the gods preserve you, brothers . The Lord Commander favored them with a half bow, and took his leave . Ser Alliser went with him, a thin smile on his face . Jon had never seen the master-at-arms look quite so happy.We met with Alfyn Crowkiller . Mance had sent him to scout along the Wall, and we chanced on him returning . Qhorin removed his helm . Alfyn will trouble the realm no longer, but some of his company escaped us . We hunted down as many as we could, but it may be that a few will win back to the mountains.Jon barked, and Grenn and Kegs slammed their shoulders against the next barrel, and sent it tottering out into empty air . [BOS] Again, [EOS] Jon promised her . [BOS] You ’ ll find someone, King ’ s Landing is a true city, a thousand times the size of Winterfell . Until you find a partner, watch how they fight in the yard . Run, and ride, make yourself strong . And whatever you do … [EOS] So we ’ re between those two, are we? Jon kept his face carefully blank . Only Eastwatch, Castle Black, and the Shadow Tower were manned when I left the Wall . I can ’ t speak to what Bowen Marsh or Ser Denys might have done since.Jon hailed him . [BOS] Lord Commander Mormont would see you at once . I ’ ll show you to his tent . [EOS] His wives must offer different prayers, Jon thought.Lord Slynt ’ s small eyes studied him . Ser Glendon, he commanded, bring in the other prisoner.You cheer me, said Edd, sounding utterly morose . And besides, there ’ s much to be said for a good sharp axe . I ’ d hate to be murdered with a maul . I saw a man hit in the brow with a maul once . Scarce split the skin at all, but his head turned mushy and swelled up big as a gourd, only purply-red . A comely man, but he died ugly . It ’ s good that we ’ re not giving them mauls . Edd walked away shaking his head, his sodden black cloak shedding rain behind him.For the baby, not for me . If it ’ s a girl, that ’ s not so bad, she ’ ll grow a few years and he ’ ll marry her . But Nella says it ’ s to be a boy, and she ’ s had six and knows these things . He gives the boys to the gods . Come the white cold, he does, and of late it comes more often . That ’ s why he started giving them sheep, even though he has a taste for mutton . Only now the sheep ’ s gone too . Next it will be dogs, till . . . She lowered her eyes and stroked her belly.They ’ re breaking, Satin said.Jon demanded . [BOS] What do you want with me? [EOS] Mance Rayder laughed . As you wish . Jon Snow, before you stands Tormund Giantsbane, Tall-talker, Horn-blower, and Breaker of Ice . And here also Tormund Thunderfist, Husband to Bears, the Mead-king of Ruddy Hall, Speaker to Gods and Father of Hosts.If you are ever Lord Commander, you may do as you please, Mormont told the ranger, but it seems to me that I have not died yet, nor have the brothers put you in my place.Jon cursed them all to their faces . They took no notice . Pyp spurred his horse closer, reciting, [BOS] I am the fire that burns against the cold, the light that brings the dawn, the horn that wakes the sleepers, the shield that guards the realms of men . [EOS] A conquest that lasted a summer, his uncle pointed out . Your Boy King lost ten thousand men taking the place, and another fifty trying to hold it . Someone should have told him that war isn ’ t a game . He took another sip of wine . Also, he said, wiping his mouth, Daeren Targaryen was only eighteen when he died . Or have you forgotten that part?Jon hesitated, then nodded slowly . [BOS] Can you climb down, or shall I bring a ladder? [EOS] You ’ ll see a hundred castles, he promised her . The battle ’ s done . Maester Aemon will see to you . He touched her hair . You ’ re kissed by fire, remember? Lucky . It will take more than an arrow to kill you . Aemon will draw it out and patch you up, and we ’ ll get you some milk of the poppy for the pain.The memory of her laughter warmed him on the long ride north.Claw, the raven cried . Claw.I … he … Jon, I didn ’ t want to … he asked … I mean … I think he knew, he sees things no one else sees …On the morrow, though . . . Jon glanced toward the shed . Eight barrels of gravel remained where twelve had stood a few moments before . He realized how tired he was then, and how much his wound was hurting . I need to sleep . A few hours, at least . He could go to Maester Aemon for some dreamwine, that would help . I am going down to the King ’ s Tower, he told them . Call me if Mance gets up to anything . Pyp, you have the Wall.There was no question of riding double . Stonesnake offered to lay in wait for the pursuit and surprise them when they came . Perhaps he could take a few of them with him down to hell . Qhorin refused . If any man in the Night ’ s Watch can make it through the Frostfangs alone and afoot, it is you, brother . You can go over mountains that a horse must go around . Make for the Fist . Tell Mormont what Jon saw, and how . Tell him that the old powers are waking, that he faces giants and wargs and worse . Tell him that the trees have eyes again.Jon said, smiling . [BOS] He likes that word, [EOS] Tell him what you will, said Maester Aemon, gently . He will smile, nod, and forget . Thirty years ago Ser Wynton Stout came within a dozen votes of being Lord Commander . He would have made a fine one . Ten years ago he would still have been capable . No longer . You know that as well as Donal did, Jon.That was different . You were soldiers . . . sentries.Smallwood told me . Long ago . All the rangers know, though few will talk of it.Jon felt a coldness pass right through him . He pressed his lips together and said nothing.Yes . His voice was thick . First we ’ ll live.Jon hated that name, a mockery that Ser Alliser had hung on him the first day he came to practice . The boys had picked it up, and now he heard it everywhere . He slid the longsword back into its scabbard . [BOS] No, [EOS] he replied.And he will, Ygritte said.I ’ m sorry, lad . There ’ s been no sign of him . They limped up to the maester ’ s door, in the long wooden keep beneath the rookery . The armorer gave it a kick . Clydas!Then the rising sun broke through to send pale lances of light across the battleground . Jon found himself holding his breath as he looked out over the half-mile swath of cleared land that lay between the Wall and the edge of the forest . In half a night they had turned it into a wasteland of blackened grass, bubbling pitch, shattered stone, and corpses . The carcass of the burned mammoth was already drawing crows . There were giants dead on the ground as well, but behind them . . .Crows . Mance made the word a curse . He turned on Jon . Did my old brothers think they ’ d catch me with my breeches down if they attacked while we were talking?The words hurt, even now . It had been so long, it seemed folly to cling to the hope that Ben Stark was still alive, but Jon Snow was nothing if not stubborn.You best not be lying, girl, Rattleshirt said to Ygritte, his eyes shiny behind the giant ’ s skull.Ghost laid his head on his paws and went to sleep by the fire . Jon stretched out beside him, grateful for the warmth . He was cold and wet, but not so cold and wet as he ’ d been a short time before . Perhaps tonight the Old Bear will learn something that will lead us to Uncle Benjen.What ’ s wrong with flowers?You ’ re the midwife . I ’ ll stay here until Mance comes back . He had lost sight of Mance but now he found him again, cutting his way through a knot of mounted men . The mammoths had shattered the center column, but the other two were closing like pincers . On the eastern edge of the camps, some archers were loosing fire arrows at the tents . He saw a mammoth pluck a knight from his saddle and fling him forty feet with a flick of its trunk . Wildlings streamed past, women and children running from the battle, some with men hurrying them along . A few of them gave Jon dark looks but Longclaw was in his hand, and no one troubled him . Even Varamyr fled, crawling off on his hands and knees.He rested for a while to let the horse graze . She did not wander far . That was good . Hobbled with a bad leg, he could never have caught her . It was all he could do to force himself back to his feet and climb onto her back . How did I ever mount her before, without saddle or stirrups, and a sword in one hand? That was another question he could not answer.We knew even before that, though, Grenn said . Rudge has been helping Donal Noye in the forge . He was there when the Old Bear brought him the burnt blade.East, the skinchanger repeated . Something ’ s coming.The Old Bear gave a stubborn shake of his head . Not yet . I want Maester Aemon to have a look at them . We ’ ll bring them back to the Wall.Well enough . I ’ d heard it before.They woke to the smoke of Mole ’ s Town burning.… and saw Lord Mormont, naked and groggy from sleep, standing in the doorway with an oil lamp in hand . Gnawed and fingerless, the arm thrashed on the floor, wriggling toward him.I know I want you, he heard himself say, all his vows and all his honor forgotten . She stood before him naked as her name day, and he was as hard as the rock around them . He had been in her half a hundred times by now, but always beneath the furs, with others all around them . He had never seen how beautiful she was . Her legs were skinny but well muscled, the hair at the juncture of her thighs a brighter red than that on her head . Does that make it even luckier? He pulled her close . I love the smell of you, he said . I love your red hair . I love your mouth, and the way you kiss me . I love your smile . I love your teats . He kissed them, one and then the other . I love your skinny legs, and what ’ s between them . He knelt to kiss her there, lightly on her mound at first, but Ygritte moved her legs apart a little, and he saw the pink inside and kissed that as well, and tasted her . She gave a little gasp . If you love me all so much, why are you still dressed? she whispered . You know nothing, Jon Snow . Noth—oh . Oh . OHHH.Jon said as Ser Endrew bullrushed his foe and knocked him sprawling . [BOS] They smell of summer, Where did Conwy find them? [EOS] That is a longsword, not an old man ’ s cane, Ser Alliser said sharply . Are your legs hurting, Lord Snow?Her eyes found him . They were full of poison . I need none of your absolution, bastard.He never said not to . Jon let go his grip on the girl ’ s hair, and she scuttled backward, away from them.She smiled, her long copper hair tumbling across her face . The Lord of Light has fiery talons, Jon Snow.Brothers, oh brothers, my days here are done,The Magnar ’ s a lord on Skagos, Noye said . There were Skagossons at Eastwatch when I first came to the Wall, I remember hearing them talk of him.The Dornishman ’ s wife would sing as she bathed,It was then that he saw Styr . The Magnar was climbing up the barricade, over the gutted corn sacks and smashed barrels and the bodies of friends and foe alike . His bronze scale armor gleamed darkly in the firelight . Styr had taken off his helm to survey the scene of his triumph, and the bald earless whoreson was smiling . In his hand was a long weirwood spear with an ornate bronze head . When he saw the gate, he pointed the spear at it and barked something in the Old Tongue to the half-dozen Thenns around him . Too late, Jon thought . You should have led your men over the barricade, you might have been able to save a few.Whilst I walk alone in the mountains,It should have been you, she told him . Then she turned back to Bran and began to weep, her whole body shaking with the sobs . Jon had never seen her cry before.Jon said finally, [BOS] You ought to thank me for killing your enemy, and curse me for killing your friend . [EOS] Jon looked around him in sick disbelief . Maester Aemon ’ s blind eyes were raised toward the light he could not see . The septon was arranging crystals on the altar . Only Sam and Dareon remained on the benches; a fat boy, a singer … and him.If it comes to battle, we could not hope for better ground than here, declared Mormont . We ’ ll strengthen the defenses . Pits and spikes, caltrops scattered on the slopes, every breach mended . Jarman, I ’ ll want your sharpest eyes as watchers . A ring of them, all around us and along the river, to warn of any approach . Hide them up in trees . And we had best start bringing up water too, more than we need . We ’ ll dig cisterns . It will keep the men occupied, and may prove needful later.All she asks, he thought . As if that were nothing.Sheathing his dirk, he wrenched Longclaw free from the body of the man he ’ d killed . You are my captive, Ygritte.I ’ m not afraid to die . It was only half a lie.Our honor means no more than our lives, so long as the realm is safe . Are you a man of the Night ’ s Watch?The guard ’ s sword was in its sheath . Jon knelt and worked it free . The heft of steel in his fist made him bolder . He moved up the steps, Ghost padding silently before him . Shadows lurked in every turn of the stair . Jon crept up warily, probing any suspicious darkness with the point of his sword.Over the Wall . It ’ s past time you proved your faith with something more than words, Jon Snow.This is no army, no more than it is a town . This is a whole people come together.There was . What of it?We might camp here tonight, Smallwood suggested.He could feel the throb of pain where her arrow had gone through the meat and muscle of his thigh . He remembered the old man ’ s eyes too, and the black blood rushing from his throat as the storm cracked overhead . But he remembered the grotto best of all, the look of her naked in the torchlight, the taste of her mouth when it opened under his . Ygritte, stay away . Go south and raid, go hide in one of those roundtowers you liked so well . You ’ ll find nothing here but death.And we are going beyond it.Doves and pigeons can also be trained to carry messages, the maester went on, though the raven is a stronger flyer, larger, bolder, far more clever, better able to defend itself against hawks … yet ravens are black, and they eat the dead, so some godly men abhor them . Baelor the Blessed tried to replace all the ravens with doves, did you know? The maester turned his white eyes on Jon, smiling . The Night ’ s Watch prefers ravens.For these men who are small can never stand tall,Thorne smiled . The Bastard wishes to defend his lady love, so we shall make an exercise of it . Rat, Pimple, help our Stone Head here . Rast and Albett moved to join Halder . Three of you ought to be sufficient to make Lady Piggy squeal . All you need do is get past the Bastard.Lord Commander Mormont had taken up residence in the King ’ s Tower after the fire had gutted his own . Jon left Ghost with the guards outside the door . More stairs, said Sam miserably as they started up . I hate stairs.Jon was lost . [BOS] My lord? [EOS] Day and night the axes rang.Jon prowled around Satin in a slow circle, sword in hand, forcing him to turn . [BOS] Get your shield up, [EOS] he said.The eagle was perched on a spine of rock far above them, outlined against the darkening sky . We ’ ve seen other eagles, Jon thought . That need not be the one I dreamed of.Styr the Magnar frowned at that . Ranging, you call it . . . why would crows come ranging up the Skirling Pass?Our Lord Commander has given the training of recruits into the hands of Ser Alliser Thorne, the maester said gently . Only he may say when a boy is ready to swear his vow, as you surely know . Why then come to me?Is this one of the direwolves I ’ ve heard so much of? a familiar voice asked close at hand.I never saw snow until last month . We were crossing the barrowlands, me and the men my father sent to see me north, and this white stuff began to fall, like a soft rain . At first I thought it was so beautiful, like feathers drifting from the sky, but it kept on and on, until I was frozen to the bone . The men had crusts of snow in their beards and more on their shoulders, and still it kept coming . I was afraid it would never end.The Weeper ’ s red rheumy eyes gave Jon another look . Aye? Well, he has a wolfish cast to him, now as I look close . Bring him to Mance, might be he ’ ll keep him . He wheeled his horse around and galloped off, his riders hard behind him.The other wight, the one-handed thing that had once been a ranger named Jafer Flowers, had also been destroyed, cut near to pieces by a dozen swords … but not before it had slain Ser Jaremy Rykker and four other men . Ser Jaremy had finished the job of hacking its head off, yet had died all the same when the headless corpse pulled his own dagger from its sheath and buried it in his bowels . Strength and courage did not avail much against foemen who would not fall because they were already dead; even arms and armor offered small protection.A line of fires burned along the top of the Wall, contained in iron baskets on poles taller than a man . The cold knife of the wind stirred and swirled the flames, so the lurid orange light was always shifting . Bundles of quarrels, arrows, spears, and scorpion bolts stood ready on every hand . Rocks were piled ten feet high, big wooden barrels of pitch and lamp oil lined up beside them . Bowen Marsh had left Castle Black well supplied in everything save men . The wind was whipping at the black cloaks of the scarecrow sentinels who stood along the ramparts, spears in hand . Jon said to Donal Noye when he limped up beside him . [BOS] I hope it wasn ’ t one of them who blew the horn, [EOS] Jon! Pyp shouted after him.I see a woman . He glanced at Dalla.The king gave the older man an irritated look . Tormund, some day try thinking before you speak . I know it was Craster . I asked Jon to see if he would tell it true.Slynt looked about the solar, at the other Eastwatch men . Does this boy think I fell off a turnip wagon onto my head?Pyp hopped off his horse and looked at the lightening sky with disgust . Give us a hand bedding down the horses, Sam, the small boy said . We have a long day before us, and no sleep to face it on, thanks to Lord Snow.I can ’ t . The smoke might be seen.The wildlings seemed to think Ygritte a great beauty because of her hair; red hair was rare among the free folk, and those who had it were said to be kissed by fire, which was supposed to be lucky . Lucky it might be, and red it certainly was, but Ygritte ’ s hair was such a tangle that Jon was tempted to ask her if she only brushed it at the changing of the seasons.When the count was done, Jon found himself surrounded . Some clapped him on the back, whilst others bent the knee to him as if he were a lord in truth . Satin, Owen the Oaf, Halder, Toad, Spare Boot, Giant, Mully, Ulmer of the Kingswood, Sweet Donnel Hill, and half a hundred more pressed around him . Dywen clacked his wooden teeth and said, Gods be good, our Lord Commander ’ s still in swaddling clothes . Iron Emmett said, I hope this don ’ t mean I can ’ t beat the bloody piss out of you next time we train, my lord . Three-Finger Hobb wanted to know if he ’ d still be eating with the men, or if he ’ d want his meals sent up to his solar . Even Bowen Marsh came up to say he would be glad to continue as Lord Steward if that was Lord Snow ’ s wish.The flames were burning low by then, the warmth fading . The fire will soon go out, Qhorin said, but if the Wall should ever fall, all the fires will go out.Then I wouldn ’ t go.By the time the torch burned out, Jon Snow no longer cared.Does House Tarly keep the old gods too? Mormont asked.And they ’ ve built a great wall through my valleys, and fished all the fish from my rills, Ygritte and Tormund sang back at him in turn, in suitably gigantic voices.The evening meal was almost done by the time he and Ghost reached the common hall . A group of the black brothers were dicing over mulled wine near the fire . His friends were at the bench nearest the west wall, laughing . Pyp was in the middle of a story . The mummer ’ s boy with the big ears was a born liar with a hundred different voices, and he did not tell his tales so much as live them, playing all the parts as needed, a king one moment and a swineherd the next . When he turned into an alehouse girl or a virgin princess, he used a high falsetto voice that reduced them all to tears of helpless laughter, and his eunuchs were always eerily accurate caricatures of Ser Alliser . Jon took as much pleasure from Pyp ’ s antics as anyone … yet that night he turned away and went instead to the end of the bench, where Samwell Tarly sat alone, as far from the others as he could get.The largest structure ever built by the hands of man, Benjen Stark had told Jon on the kingsroad when they had first caught sight of the Wall in the distance . And beyond a doubt the most useless, Tyrion Lannister had added with a grin, but even the Imp grew silent as they rode closer . You could see it from miles off, a pale blue line across the northern horizon, stretching away to the east and west and vanishing in the far distance, immense and unbroken . This is the end of the world, it seemed to say.Jon said grimly . I want a fire, a hot meal, a warm bed, and something to make my leg stop hurting, he told himself . But first he had to check the tunnel and find what had become of Donal Noye . [BOS] Ask me when I ’ ve seen the gate, [EOS] Here they come, someone said in a hoarse voice.I never did, she said . I left out part, is all.Jon said . [BOS] Old enough to treat visitors with more courtesy than you, Give him my pardons . I would not disturb his rest if it were not important . [EOS] No . He could hear the defeat in her voice . Sorry to be of trouble, m ’ lord . I only . . . they said the king keeps people safe, and I thought . . . Despairing, she ran, Sam ’ s cloak flapping behind her like great black wings.Sam took a bird from one of the cages, stroked its feathers, attached the message, and said, Fly home now, brave one . Home . The raven quorked something unintelligible back at him, and Sam tossed it into the air . Flapping, it beat its way skyward through the trees . I wish he could carry me with him.I am no lordling . Only a brother of the Night ’ s Watch . I knew Lord Eddard, yes . And his father before him.Yes . Jon thought of Gilly . She and her sisters . They were nineteen, and Craster was one, but . . .At evenfall, as the sun sets and we face the gathering night, you shall take your vows . From that moment, you will be a Sworn Brother of the Night ’ s Watch . Your crimes will be washed away, your debts forgiven . So too you must wash away your former loyalties, put aside your grudges, forget old wrongs and old loves alike . Here you begin anew.How else? Sorcery . Qhorin bit the egg in half . Why else would Mance choose to gather his strength in the Frostfangs? Bleak and hard they are, and a long weary march from the Wall.You said you were the Bastard o ’ Winterfell.Grenn looked away . He killed one of the Others, Jon . I saw it . He stabbed him with that dragonglass knife you made him, and we started calling him Sam the Slayer . He hated that.No, but I counted their giants as best I could.An old tree . Mormont sat his horse, frowning . Old, his raven agreed from his shoulder . Old, old, old.Maybe it is so, Maester Aemon said . Tell me, Chett, what would you have us do with such a boy?A wind sighed through the trees, rich with the smell of pine needles, tugging at his faded blacks . Jon could see the Wall looming high and dark to the south, a great shadow blocking out the stars . The rough hilly ground made him think they must be somewhere between the Shadow Tower and Castle Black, and likely closer to the former . For days they had been wending their way south between deep lakes that stretched like long thin fingers along the floors of narrow valleys, while flint ridges and pine-clad hills jostled against one another to either side . Such ground made for slow riding, but offered easy concealment for those wishing to approach the Wall unseen.The gods made the earth for all men t ’ share . Only when the kings come with their crowns and steel swords, they claimed it was all theirs . My trees, they said, you can ’ t eat them apples . My stream, you can ’ t fish here . My wood, you ’ re not t ’ hunt . My earth, my water, my castle, my daughter, keep your hands away or I ’ ll chop ’ em off, but maybe if you kneel t ’ me I ’ ll let you have a sniff . You call us thieves, but at least a thief has t ’ be brave and clever and quick . A kneeler only has t ’ kneel.I should like to hear them both, Sam admitted, but they would not want me there . His face was troubled . He ’ s going to make me fight again on the morrow, isn ’ t he?I ’ m the Old Bear ’ s steward . I ’ ll need to squire for him, tend his horse, set up his tent; I won ’ t have time to watch over birds as well . Sam, you said the words . You ’ re a brother of the Night ’ s Watch now.No better time to start than now, said Stonesnake.Men . Men on horses . Men in steel and men in black.They feel it too . I ’ d best see to the Old Bear, he said . He gets noisy when he isn ’ t fed as well.I hear that a good many rangers have vanished of late, Lannister said as they mounted the steps to the common hall . He grinned and pulled open the door . Perhaps the grumkins are hungry this year.A boy at a feast, five years past . He ’ d come trading with his brothers, and he had hair like mine, kissed by fire, so I thought he would be lucky . But he was weak . When he came back t ’ try and steal me, Longspear broke his arm and ran him off, and he never tried again, not once.We do, but—Might be after we could come back here, and live in that tower, she said . Would you want that, Jon Snow? After?JON SNOW! One of the Thenns loomed above them, frowning . Magnar wants . Jon thought it might have been the same man who ’ d found him outside the cave, the night before they climbed the Wall, but he could not be sure . He got to his feet . Ygritte came with him, which always made Styr frown, but whenever he tried to dismiss her she would remind him that she was a free woman, not a kneeler . She came and went as she pleased.The Old Bear sighed . You are not the only one touched by this war . Like as not, my sister is marching in your brother ’ s host, her and those daughters of hers, dressed in men ’ s mail . Maege is a hoary old snark, stubborn, short-tempered, and willful . Truth be told, I can hardly stand to be around the wretched woman, but that does not mean my love for her is any less than the love you bear your half sisters . Frowning, Mormont took his last egg and squeezed it in his fist until the shell crunched . Or perhaps it does . Be that as it may, I ’ d still grieve if she were slain, yet you don ’ t see me running off . I said the words, just as you did . My place is here … where is yours, boy?Jon followed his finger, and found himself in a dim back room wandering through a maze of columns and stalactites . She can ’ t be here, he was thinking, when he heard her laugh . He turned toward the sound, but within ten paces he was in a dead end, facing a blank wall of rose and white flowstone . Baffled, he made his way back the way he ’ d come, and then he saw it: a dark hole under an outthrust of wet stone . He knelt, listened, heard the faint sound of water . [BOS] Ygritte? [EOS] The giants swayed slowly atop the mammoths as they rode past two by two . Jon ’ s garron shied, frightened by such strangeness, but whether it was the mammoths or their riders that scared him it was hard to say . Even Ghost backed off a step, baring his teeth in a silent snarl . The direwolf was big, but the mammoths were a deal bigger, and there were many and more of them.Jon replied . [BOS] Yes, Two of the six he took with him . They ’ d been dead a long time, only … the bodies are queer . [EOS] Jon heard Grenn suck in his breath, shocked . Silence fell.Jon has a different part to play.Benjen Stark is still First Ranger, Jon Snow told him, toying with his bowl of blueberries . The rest might have given up all hope of his uncle ’ s safe return, but not him . He pushed away the berries, scarcely touched, and rose from the bench.Won ’ t Craster be angry with you?Iron Emmett was a long, lanky young ranger whose endurance, strength, and swordsmanship were the pride of Eastwatch . Jon always came away from their sessions stiff and sore, and woke the next day covered with bruises, which was just the way he wanted it . He would never get any better going up against the likes of Satin and Horse, or even Grenn.Jon asked Satin . [BOS] What gods do you pray to? [EOS] Jon faced him . [BOS] If you ’ ve had the Horn of Joramun all along, why haven ’ t you used it? Why bother building turtles and sending Thenns to kill us in our beds? If this horn is all the songs say, why not just sound it and be done? [EOS] Are you well, Snow? Lord Mormont asked, scowling.Jon said . He rose . Standing, he was taller than the dwarf . It made him feel strange . [BOS] I know, [EOS] Pity, we could use a horse like that.All I know is that the blood of the First Men flows in the veins of the Starks . The First Men built the Wall, and it ’ s said they remember things otherwise forgotten . And that beast of yours … he led us to the wights, warned you of the dead man on the steps . Ser Jaremy would doubtless call that happenstance, yet Ser Jaremy is dead and I ’ m not . Lord Mormont stabbed a chunk of ham with the point of his dagger . I think you were meant to be here, and I want you and that wolf of yours with us when we go beyond the Wall.Noye drew him closer . You ’ ve heard these tidings of your brother?Jon had hoped that the arrival of men from the Shadow Tower would lift the spirits in the camp . Only last night, he was coming back through the dark from a piss when he heard five or six men talking in low voices around the embers of a fire . When he heard Chett muttering that it was past time they turned back, Jon stopped to listen . It ’ s an old man ’ s folly, this ranging, he heard . We ’ ll find nothing but our graves in them mountains.The pale pink light of dawn sparkled on branch and leaf and stone . Every blade of grass was carved from emerald, every drip of water turned to diamond . Flowers and mushrooms alike wore coats of glass . Even the mud puddles had a bright brown sheen . Through the shimmering greenery, the black tents of his brothers were encased in a fine glaze of ice.The wildling king studied his face . Who had the command here? And tell me true . Was it Rykker? Smallwood? Not Wythers, he ’ s too feeble . Whose tent was this?Jon was cold with rage . [BOS] Can I go? [EOS] Do you ever find anyone in your dream? Sam asked.Jon smiled.Granite does not burn easily, Stannis said . The castle can be rebuilt, in time . It ’ s not the walls that make a lord, it ’ s the man . Your northmen do not know me, have no reason to love me, yet I will need their strength in the battles yet to come . I need a son of Eddard Stark to win them to my banner.Maester Aemon touched his own collar lightly, his bony, wrinkled finger stroking the heavy metal links . Go on.All the same, Jon found himself hoping that Styr ’ s fears proved well founded . If the gods are good, a patrol will chance by and put an end to this . No wall can keep you safe, his father had told him once, as they walked the walls of Winterfall . A wall is only as strong as the men who defend it . The wildlings might have a hundred and twenty men, but four defenders would be enough to see them off, with a few well-placed arrows and perhaps a pail of stones.Qhorin said nothing of taking captives, said Stonesnake.There is, thought Jon, remembering the night in the Lord Commander ’ s chambers . It smells like death . Suddenly he was not hungry anymore . He gave his stew to Grenn, who looked in need of an extra supper to warm him against the night.Vanished, aye, said Mance Rayder . And not just the free folk . Who told you where we were, Jon Snow?My son brought dishonor to House Mormont, but at least he had the grace to leave the sword behind when he fled . My sister returned it to my keeping, but the very sight of it reminded me of Jorah ’ s shame, so I put it aside and thought no more of it until we found it in the ashes of my bedchamber . The original pommel was a bear ’ s head, silver, yet so worn its features were all but indistinguishable . For you, I thought a white wolf more apt . One of our builders is a fair stonecarver.You know, Mormont grumbled . How is it that everyone knows everything around here? He did not seem to expect an answer . It would seem there were only the two of … of those creatures, whatever they were, I will not call them men . And thank the gods for that . Any more and … well, that doesn ’ t bear thinking of . There will be more, though . I can feel it in these old bones of mine, and Maester Aemon agrees . The cold winds are rising . Summer is at an end, and a winter is coming such as this world has never seen.He stood in the door for a moment, afraid to speak, afraid to come closer . The window was open . Below, a wolf howled . Ghost heard and lifted his head.Satin pissed himself when the horns blew, but Jon pretended not to notice . Go shake Dick by the shoulder, he told the Oldtown boy, else he ’ s liable to sleep through the fight.The gate! Pyp cried out . They ’ re at the GATE!Quiet, Mormont growled up at the bird . The Old Bear was too proud to admit to weakness, but Jon was not deceived . The strain of keeping up with younger men was taking its toll.Toad sidled close . Your rosy butt cheeks, what else?The rest of the afternoon passed as if in a dream . Jon could not have said where he walked, what he did, who he spoke with . Ghost was with him, he knew that much . The silent presence of the direwolf gave him comfort . The girls do not even have that much, he thought . Their wolves might have kept them safe, but Lady is dead and Nymeria ’ s lost, they ’ re all alone.I should have stayed in that cave with Ygritte . If there was a life beyond this one, he hoped to tell her that . She will claw my face the way the eagle did, and curse me for a coward, but I ’ ll tell her all the same . He flexed his sword hand, as Maester Aemon had taught him . The habit had become part of him, and he would need his fingers to be limber to have even half a chance of murdering Mance Rayder.Sam mopped at the sweat on his brow . You … you can see where Ghost … Jon ’ s direwolf … you can see where he tore off that man ’ s hand, and yet … the stump hasn ’ t bled, look … He waved a hand . My father … L-lord Randyll, he, he made me watch him dress animals sometimes, when … after … Sam shook his head from side to side, his chins quivering . Now that he had looked at the bodies, he could not seem to look away . A fresh kill … the blood would still flow, my lords . Later … later it would be clotted, like a … a jelly, thick and … and … He looked as though he was going to be sick . This man … look at the wrist, it ’ s all … crusty … dry … like …The Lord Commander wants to see you . Now.Bastard of Winterfell and brother to kings, mocked Chett, who ’ d left his hounds to see what the commotion was about.Noye and his men had been waiting within, behind a gate of heavy iron bars like the two Pyp had just unlocked . The two crossbows had gotten off a dozen quarrels as the giant struggled toward them . Then the spearmen must have come to the fore, stabbing through the bars . Still the giant found the strength to reach through, twist the head off Spotted Pate, seize the iron gate, and wrench the bars apart . Links of broken chain lay strewn across the floor . One giant . All this was the work of one giant.He was at the door when she called out to him . Jon, she said . He should have kept going, but she had never called him by his name before . He turned to find her looking at his face, as if she were seeing it for the first time.A warg he may be, Ygritte said, but that has never frightened us . Others shouted agreement . Behind the eyeholes of his yellowed skull Rattleshirt ’ s stare was malignant, but he yielded grudgingly . These are a free folk indeed, thought Jon.When I was little, my father used to insist that I attend him in the audience chamber whenever he held court . When he rode to Highgarden to bend his knee to Lord Tyrell, he made me come . Later, though, he started to take Dickon and leave me at home, and he no longer cared whether I sat through his audiences, so long as Dickon was there . He wanted his heir at his side, don ’ t you see? To watch and listen and learn from all he did . I ’ ll wager that ’ s why Lord Mormont requested you, Jon . What else could it be? He wants to groom you for command!To his left, the catapult made a thunk and filled the air with spinning stones . They plonked down on the turtle like hail, and caromed harmlessly aside . The wildling archers were still loosing arrows from behind their mantlets . One thudded into the face of a straw man, and Pyp said, Four for Watt of Long Lake! We have a tie! The next shaft whistled past his own ear, however . Fie! he shouted down . I ’ m not in the tourney!Sam got awkwardly to his feet . I had better try to sleep, He huddled down in his cloak and plodded off.They could take him back, Jon told himself, but they could not make him stay . The war would not end on the morrow, or the day after, and his friends could not watch him day and night . He would bide his time, make them think he was content to remain here … and then, when they had grown lax, he would be off again . Next time he would avoid the kingsroad . He could follow the Wall east, perhaps all the way to the sea, a longer route but a safer one . Or even west, to the mountains, and then south over the high passes . That was the wildling ’ s way, hard and perilous, but at least no one would follow him . He wouldn ’ t stray within a hundred leagues of Winterfell or the kingsroad.Qhorin swung down from his saddle . My men are hungry, and our horses require tending.He ’ s frightened . We ’ re leaving him . He remembered the day he had left Winterfell, all the bittersweet farewells; Bran lying broken, Robb with snow in his hair, Arya raining kisses on him after he ’ d given her Needle . Once we say our words, we ’ ll all have duties to attend to . Some of us may be sent away, to Eastwatch or the Shadow Tower . Sam will remain in training, with the likes of Rast and Cuger and these new boys who are coming up the kingsroad . Gods only know what they ’ ll be like, but you can bet Ser Alliser will send them against him, first chance he gets.Ser Jaremy stood . The Wildlings have axes too.Spare me your but ’ s, boy, Lord Mormont interrupted . I would not be sitting here were it not for you and that beast of yours . You fought bravely … and more to the point, you thought quickly . Fire! Yes, damn it . We ought to have known . We ought to have remembered . The Long Night has come before . Oh, eight thousand years is a good while, to be sure … yet if the Night ’ s Watch does not remember, who will?Someone will come down out of the Frostfangs, my lord, the ranger said . If us, all well and good . If not, it will be Mance Rayder, and you sit square in his path . He cannot march south and leave you behind, to follow and harry his rear . He must attack . This is a strong place.She giggled at him . It ’ s so skinny.Jon said, affronted . [BOS] No, [EOS] The more I drank the more I thought about her, and the more I thought the harder me member got, till I couldn ’ t suffer it no more . Fool that I was, I bundled meself up in furs from head to heels, wrapped a winding wool around me face, and set off to find her . The snow was coming down so hard I got turned around once or twice, and the wind blew right through me and froze me bones, but finally I come on her, all bundled up like I was.Jon told him . [BOS] I would sooner not hurt you, Move aside, Sam, or I ’ ll ride you down . [EOS] They hunt me with dogs in the daylight,He asked for an envoy, we are sending one, said Slynt . If you are too craven to face this turncloak king, we can return you to your ice cell . This time without the furs, I think . Yes.Frowning, Jon continued on his way . He led the mare for half an hour, until she was dry . Ghost did not appear . Jon wanted to mount up and ride again, but he was concerned about his missing wolf . Ghost, he called again . Where are you? To me! Ghost! Nothing in these woods could trouble a direwolf, even a half-grown direwolf, unless … no, Ghost was too smart to attack a bear, and if there was a wolf pack anywhere close Jon would have surely heard them howling.Grenn was staring at him with wide eyes, but Dolorous Edd said, All I smell is the shit of two hundred horses . And this stew . Which has a similar aroma, now that I come to sniff it.That made the wildling grin . Well said, lad . I see your cloak is black . Mance won ’ t like that . If you ’ ve come to change sides again, best climb back on that Wall o ’ yours.Ghost loped ahead of them . The grounds seemed deserted this morning, with so many rangers off at the brothel in Mole ’ s Town, digging for buried treasure and drinking themselves blind . Grenn had gone with them . Pyp and Halder and Toad had offered to buy him his first woman to celebrate his first ranging . They ’ d wanted Jon and Sam to come as well, but Sam was almost as frightened of whores as he was of the haunted forest, and Jon had wanted no part of it . Do what you want, he told Toad, I took a vow.One of the mammoths was running berserk, smashing wildlings with his trunk and crushing archers underfoot . Jon pulled back his bow once more, and launched another arrow at the beast ’ s shaggy back to urge him on . To east and west, the flanks of the wildling host had reached the Wall unopposed . The chariots drew in or turned while the horsemen milled aimlessly beneath the looming cliff of ice . At the gate! a shout came . Spare Boot, maybe . Mammoth at the gate!Robert, Jon thought for one mad moment, remembering poor Owen, but when the trumpets blew again and the knights charged, the name they cried was Stannis! Stannis! STANNIS!No . Jon ’ s grief over Ygritte was too fresh for him to deny her now . No, my lord.Mormont rounded on him . So you believe this is Mance Rayder ’ s work? This close to the Wall?Soon they were high enough so that looking down was best not considered . There was nothing below but yawning blackness, nothing above but moon and stars . The mountain is your mother, Stonesnake had told him during an easier climb a few days past . Cling to her, press your face up against her teats, and she won ’ t drop you . Jon had made a joke of it, saying how he ’ d always wondered who his mother was, but never thought to find her in the Frostfangs . It did not seem nearly so amusing now . One step and then another, he thought, clinging tight.I had nothing to do with the bird, Sam insisted . When it flew out of the kettle I almost wet myself.The good woman at the brazier, Mance Rayder went on, is Dalla . The pregnant woman smiled shyly . Treat her like you would any queen, she is carrying my child . He turned to the last two . This beauty is her sister Val . Young Jarl beside her is her latest pet.Jon ran down the stairs, a smile on his face and Robb ’ s letter in his hand . My brother is going to live, he told the guards . They exchanged a look . He ran back to the common hall, where he found Tyrion Lannister just finishing his meal . He grabbed the little man under the arms, hoisted him up in the air, and spun him around in a circle . Bran is going to live! he whooped . Lannister looked startled . Jon put him down and thrust the paper into his hands . Here, read it, he said.Thunder rumbled softly in the distance, but above him the clouds were breaking up . Jon searched the sky until he found the Ice Dragon, then turned the mare north for the Wall and Castle Black . The throb of pain in his thigh muscle made him wince as he put his heels into the old man ’ s horse . I am going home, he told himself . But if that was true, why did he feel so hollow?He would need to find new clothes soon; most like, he ’ d need to steal them . He was clad in black from head to heel; high leather riding boots, roughspun breeches and tunic, sleeveless leather jerkin, and heavy wool cloak . His longsword and dagger were sheathed in black moleskin, and the hauberk and coif in his saddlebag were black ringmail . Any bit of it could mean his death if he were taken . A stranger wearing black was viewed with cold suspicion in every village and holdfast north of the Neck, and men would soon be watching for him . Once Maester Aemon ’ s ravens took flight, Jon knew he would find no safe haven . Not even at Winterfell . Bran might want to let him in, but Maester Luwin had better sense . He would bar the gates and send Jon away, as he should . Better not to call there at all.That Mance Rayder? Craster spit into the fire . King-beyond-the-Wall . What do free folk want with kings? He turned his squint on Mormont . There ’ s much I could tell you o ’ Rayder and his doings, if I had a mind . This o ’ the empty villages, that ’ s his work . You would have found this hall abandoned as well, if I were a man to scrape to such . He sends a rider, tells me I must leave my own keep to come grovel at his feet . I sent the man back, but kept his tongue . It ’ s nailed to that wall there . He pointed . Might be that I could tell you where to seek Mance Rayder . If I had a mind . The brown smile again . But we ’ ll have time enough for that . You ’ ll be wanting to sleep beneath my roof, belike, and eat me out of pigs.Suddenly she looked like she was going to cry . I wish you were coming with us.Cold? A hard frost was settling over the castle, and Jon could hear the soft crunch of grey weeds beneath his boots.Once his foot slipped as he put his weight on it and his heart stopped in his chest, but the gods were good and he did not fall . He could feel the cold seeping off the rock into his fingers, but he dared not don his gloves; gloves would slip, no matter how tight they seemed, cloth and fur moving between skin and stone, and up here that could kill him . His burned hand was stiffening up on him, and soon it began to ache . Then he ripped open his thumbnail somehow, and after that he left smears of blood wherever he put his hand . He hoped he still had all his fingers by the end of the climb.Samwell Tarly must have read their thoughts on their faces . His eyes met Jon ’ s and darted away, quick as frightened animals . I … I ’ m sorry, he said . I don ’ t mean to … to be like I am . He walked heavily toward the armory.Jon pointed out . [BOS] Craster weds his daughters, [EOS] Qhorin Halfhand made no comment when he saw the prisoner . There were three, Stonesnake told him . No more than that.Jon messed up her hair . [BOS] I will miss you, little sister . [EOS] Halder lifted the sword for another blow . Cut us off a ham! Rast urged, laughing.Jon held out a hand to pull Sam back to his feet . The rangers gathered round to offer smiles and congratulations, all but the gnarled old forester Dywen . Best we be starting back, m ’ lord, he said to Bowen Marsh . Dark ’ s falling, and there ’ s something in the smell o ’ the night that I mislike.If it please my lord, what would you have of King Renly?Mance, Rattleshirt said, I want me some crow bones.Slave, muttered the raven.The Old Bear gave a loud snort, and the raven took flight, flapping in a circle about the room . Give me a man for every vow I ’ ve seen broken and the Wall will never lack for defenders.Gut him . That was Rattleshirt, still ahorse . The eagle flew to him and perched atop his bony helm, screeching.She stared at the flames as if she could not hear him.Long hours later, the rain stopped . Jon found himself alone in a sea of tall black grass . There was a deep throbbing ache in his right thigh . When he looked down, he was surprised to see an arrow jutting out the back of it . When did that happen? He grabbed hold of the shaft and gave it a tug, but the arrowhead was sunk deep in the meat of his leg, and the pain when he pulled on it was excruciating . He tried to think back on the madness at the inn, but all he could remember was the beast, gaunt and grey and terrible . It was too large to be a common wolf . A direwolf, then . It had to be . He had never seen an animal move so fast . Like a grey wind . . . Could Robb have returned to the north?They heard the thump as it struck the Wall on the way down, and then, much louder, the crash and crack of splintering wood, followed by shouts and screams . Satin whooped and Owen the Oaf danced in circles, while Pyp leaned out and called, The turtle was stuffed full of rabbits! Look at them hop away!Not at your hands . Mance studied Jon ’ s face . You saw the Fist of the First Men . You know what happened there . You know what we are facing.I wanted him to stay here with me, Lady Stark said softly.Yes, he said.Lord Janos Slynt sat down so heavily he made a thump, but Ser Alliser filled the vault with mocking laughter . Ser Piggy thinks we ’ re all fools, brothers, he said . He ’ s taught the bird this little trick . They all say snow, go up to the rookery and hear for yourselves . Mormont ’ s bird had more words than that.Jon told him . [BOS] Stop them, [EOS] The raven laughed shrilly . Boy, boy, boy, boy.Mormont will not run, Jon thought . He is too old and he has come too far . He will strike, and damn the numbers . One day soon he would hear the sound of warhorns, and see a column of riders pounding down on them with black cloaks flapping and cold steel in their hands . Three hundred men could not hope to kill a hundred times their number, of course, but Jon did not think they would need to . He need not slay a thousand, only one . Mance is all that keeps them together.His name may not be spoken, Melisandre added softly . He is the God of Night and Terror, Jon Snow, and these shapes in the snow are his creatures.In legend, Brandon the Builder had used giants to help raise Winterfell, but Jon did not want to confuse the issue . Men can build a lot higher than this . In Oldtown there ’ s a tower taller than the Wall . He could tell she did not believe him . If I could show her Winterfell . . . give her a flower from the glass gardens, feast her in the Great Hall, and show her the stone kings on their thrones . We could bathe in the hot pools, and love beneath the heart tree while the old gods watched over us.Even now, he did not know if he was doing the honorable thing . The southron had it easier . They had their septons to talk to, someone to tell them the gods ’ will and help sort out right from wrong . But the Starks worshiped the old gods, the nameless gods, and if the heart trees heard, they did not speak.Qhorin sat in his saddle, studying the eagle for a long time . We press on, he finally said . The rangers resumed their descent.The water ’ s icing up, Qhorin observed as he turned aside, else we ’ d ride in the streambed . But if we break the ice, they are like to see . Keep close to the cliffs . There ’ s a crook a half mile on that will hide us . He rode into the defile . Jon gave one last wistful look to their distant fire, and followed.I eat in no hall where I ’ m not welcome . Tormund got to his feet . Me and the hens are leaving . He snatched another chicken off the brazier, shoved it into a pocket sewn in the lining of his cloak, said Har, and left licking his fingers . The others followed him out, all but the woman Dalla.Jon asked her . He did not know if he could face those heights again, or if his garron could survive a second crossing . [BOS] Will we return by the Skirling Pass? [EOS] So he was . His father ’ s father was Daeron Targaryen, the Second of His Name, who brought Dorne into the realm . Part of the pact was that he wed a Dornish princess . She gave him four sons . Aemon ’ s father Maekar was the youngest of those, and Aemon was his third son . Mind you, all this happened long before I was born, ancient as Smallwood would make me.Oh . Ygritte cupped his cheek with her hand . You know nothing, Jon Snow, she sighed, dying.The men who formed the Night ’ s Watch knew that only their courage shielded the realm from the darkness to the north . They knew they must have no divided loyalties to weaken their resolve . So they vowed they would have no wives nor children.Jon pointed . [BOS] There . Gone to fight . [EOS] The king led his ragged wedge into a knot of rangers, his sword flashing.Maester Aemon had sent a lot of birds . . . not to one king, but to four . Wildlings at the gate, the message ran . The realm in danger . Send all the help you can to Castle Black . Even as far as Oldtown and the Citadel the ravens flew, and to half a hundred mighty lords in their castles . The northern lords offered their best hope, so to them Aemon had sent two birds . To the Umbers and the Boltons, to Castle Cerwyn and Torrhen ’ s Square, Karhold and Deepwood Motte, to Bear Island, Oldcastle, Widow ’ s Watch, White Harbor, Barrowton, and the Rills, to the mountain fastnesses of the Liddles, the Burleys, the Norreys, the Harclays, and the Wulls, the black birds brought their plea . Wildlings at the gate . The north in danger . Come with all your strength.The answer was there . Is it . . . it seems to me that it might be easier for one man to find two hundred than for two hundred to find one.He found Maester Aemon up in the rookery, feeding the ravens . Clydas was with him, carrying a bucket of chopped meat as they shuffled from cage to cage . Sam said you wanted me?She would be dead, and I would know you better than I had before . But enough talk . You ought be sleeping . We have leagues to go, and dangers to face . You will need your strength.Satin, Horse, and the others were looking to him, Jon knew, waiting for his orders . He was so tired, he hardly knew any more . The Wall is mine, he reminded himself . Owen, Horse, to the catapults . Kegs, you and Spare Boot on the scorpions . The rest of you string your bows . Fire arrows . Let ’ s see if we can burn it . It was likely to be a futile gesture, Jon knew, but it had to be better than standing helpless.I won ’ t run, if that ’ s what you mean . Ghost moved out from under the trees and Jon glared at him . Small help you were, he said . The deep red eyes looked at him knowingly.Ghost returned as he crested a rise and saw the distant glow of lamplight from the Lord Commander ’ s Tower . The direwolf ’ s muzzle was red with blood as he trotted beside the horse . Jon found himself thinking of Samwell Tarly again on the ride back . By the time he reached the stables, he knew what he must do.My father was murdered . Jon was past caring what they did to him, but he would not suffer any more lies about his father.They ought to be safe here . The hill offered commanding views, and the slopes were precipitous to the north and west and only slightly more gentle to the east . Yet as the dusk deepened and darkness seeped into the hollows between the trees, Jon ’ s sense of foreboding grew . This is the haunted forest, he told himself . Maybe there are ghosts here, the spirits of the First Men . This was their place, once.Too bloody plain, thought Jon, and it seems that half the column has seen it . He studied the falling snow so Tormund might not see him redden . I am a man of the Night ’ s Watch, he reminded himself . So why did he feel like some blushing maid?It was hard to put into words . Jon stared down at his hands helplessly . [BOS] My father never used a headsman . He said he owed it to men he killed to look into their eyes and hear their last words . And when I looked into Ygritte ’ s eyes, I . . . I know she was an enemy, but there was no evil in her . [EOS] Ghost emerged from the undergrowth so suddenly that the garron shied and reared . The white wolf hunted well away from the line of march, but he was not having much better fortune than the foragers Smallwood sent out after game . The woods were as empty as the villages, Dywen had told him one night around the fire . We ’ re a large party, Jon had said . The game ’ s probably been frightened away by all the noise we make on the march.Jon was showing Dareon how best to deliver a sidestroke when the new recruit entered the practice yard . Your feet should be farther apart, he urged . You don ’ t want to lose your balance . That ’ s good . Now pivot as you deliver the stroke, get all your weight behind the blade.You did not wake me, Maester Aemon replied . I find I need less sleep as I grow older, and I am grown very old . I often spend half the night with ghosts, remembering times fifty years past as if they were yesterday . The mystery of a midnight visitor is a welcome diversion . So tell me, Jon Snow, why have you come calling at this strange hour?Who will I practice with?The Magnar was direct . Jarl has warned me of crows, patrolling on high . Tell me all you know of these patrols.The dwarf lifted an eyebrow . Would you rather be called the Imp? Let them see that their words can cut you, and you ’ ll never be free of the mockery . If they want to give you a name, take it, make it your own . Then they can ’ t hurt you with it anymore . He gestured with his stick . Come, walk with me . They ’ ll be serving some vile stew in the common hall by now, and I could do with a bowl of something hot.The direwolf twisted free of Jon ’ s grasp, his ears pricked up . And suddenly he was bounding away . He loped through a tangle of brush, leapt a deadfall, and raced down the hillside, a pale streak among the trees . Off to Castle Black? Jon wondered . Or off after a hare? He wished he knew . He feared he might prove just as poor a warg as a sworn brother and a spy.Eagles have sharper eyes than men . We are seen . So now we run . The Halfhand wound a long black scarf around his face and swung up into the saddle.His uncle was sharp-featured and gaunt as a mountain crag, but there was always a hint of laughter in his blue-grey eyes . He dressed in black, as befitted a man of the Night ’ s Watch . Tonight it was rich black velvet, with high leather boots and a wide belt with a silver buckle . A heavy silver chain was looped round his neck . Benjen watched Ghost with amusement as he ate his onion . A very quiet wolf, he observed.I was born in a house much like this, declared Dolorous Edd . Those were my enchanted years . Later I fell on hard times . A nest of dry straw bedding filled one corner of the room . Edd looked at it with longing . I ’ d give all the gold in Casterly Rock to sleep in a bed again.He walked towards the water, and discovered an almost dry spot beneath the leaning daub-and-wattle wall of a tumbledown cottage that had mostly tumbled down . That was where Ygritte found him sitting, staring off across the rain-whipped lake . I know this place, he told her when she sat beside him . That tower . . . look at the top of it the next time the lightning flashes, and tell me what you see.At the ringwall, he found the guards sliding spikes from the half-frozen earth to make an opening . It was not long until the first of the brothers from the Shadow Tower began wending their way up the slope . All in leather and fur they were, with here and there a bit of steel or bronze; heavy beards covered hard lean faces, and made them look as shaggy as their garrons . Jon was surprised to see some of them were riding two to a horse . When he looked more closely, it was plain that many of them were wounded . There has been trouble on the way.Grenn and Dywen were among the brothers who had gathered round the fire . Hake handed Jon a hollow heel of bread filled with burnt bacon and chunks of salt fish warmed in bacon grease . He wolfed it down while listening to Dywen boast of having three of Craster ’ s women during the night.Once I prick you and let the air out, you ’ ll shrink down smaller ’ n that girl . Stand aside, or Mance will hear o ’ this.I know one thing Sam could do better than anyone.He had no destination in mind . He wanted only to ride . He followed the creek for a time, listening to the icy trickle of water over rock, then cut across the fields to the kingsroad . It stretched out before him, narrow and stony and pocked with weeds, a road of no particular promise, yet the sight of it filled Jon Snow with a vast longing . Winterfell was down that road, and beyond it Riverrun and King ’ s Landing and the Eyrie and so many other places; Casterly Rock, the Isles of Faces, the red mountains of Dorne, the hundred islands of Braavos in the sea, the smoking ruins of old Valyria . All the places that Jon would never see . The world was down that road … and he was here.Good, Mormont said . We ’ ve seen the dead come back, you and me, and it ’ s not something I care to see again . He ate the egg in two bites and flicked a bit of shell out from between his teeth . Your brother is in the field with all the power of the north behind him . Any one of his lords bannermen commands more swords than you ’ ll find in all the Night ’ s Watch . Why do you imagine that they need your help? Are you such a mighty warrior, or do you carry a grumkin in your pocket to magic up your sword?No . Sam ’ s mouth grew tight and hard . I hated it there . He scratched Ghost behind the ear, brooding, and Jon let the silence breathe . After a long while Samwell Tarly began to talk, and Jon Snow listened quietly, and learned how it was that a self-confessed coward found himself on the Wall.The other boys fell silent, taken aback by his sudden fury . Jon said into the quiet, and he told them how it was going to be . Pyp backed him, as he ’ d known he would, but when Halder spoke up, it was a pleasant surprise . Grenn was anxious at the first, but Jon knew the words to move him . One by one the rest fell in line . Jon persuaded some, cajoled some, shamed the others, made threats where threats were required . At the end they had all agreed … all but Rast . [BOS] Listen to me, [EOS] Mormont gave a whistle, and the bird flew to him again and settled on his arm . A lord ’ s one thing, a king ’ s another . He offered the raven a handful of corn from his pocket . They will garb your brother Robb in silks, satins, and velvets of a hundred different colors, while you live and die in black ringmail . He will wed some beautiful princess and father sons on her . You ’ ll have no wife, nor will you ever hold a child of your own blood in your arms . Robb will rule, you will serve . Men will call you a crow . Him they ’ ll call Your Grace . Singers will praise every little thing he does, while your greatest deeds all go unsung . Tell me that none of this troubles you, Jon . . . and I ’ ll name you a liar, and know I have the truth of it.He raised Longclaw over his head, both hands tight around the grip . One cut, with all my weight behind it . He could give her a quick clean death, at least . He was his father ’ s son . Wasn ’ t he? Wasn ’ t he?Ghost ’ s muzzle was dripping red, but only the point of the bastard blade was stained, the last half inch . Jon pulled the direwolf away and knelt with one arm around him . The light was already fading in Qhorin ’ s eyes . . . . sharp, he said, lifting his maimed fingers . Then his hand fell, and he was gone.Qhorin ’ s mouth tightened as he followed its flight with his eyes . Here is as good a place as any to make a stand, he declared . The mouth of the cave shelters us from above, and they cannot get behind us without passing through the mountain . Is your sword sharp, Jon Snow?The other boys gathered round the eight who had been named, laughing and cursing and offering congratulations . Halder smacked Toad on the butt with the flat of his sword and shouted, Toad, of the Night ’ s Watch! Yelling that a black brother needed a horse, Pyp leapt onto Grenn ’ s shoulders, and they tumbled to the ground, rolling and punching and hooting . Dareon dashed inside the armory and returned with a skin of sour red . As they passed the wine from hand to hand, grinning like fools, Jon noticed Samwell Tarly standing by himself beneath a bare dead tree in the corner of the yard . Jon offered him the skin . A swallow of wine?Skinchanger? said Ebben grimly, looking at the Halfhand . Does he mean the eagle? Jon wondered . Or me? Skinchangers and wargs belonged in Old Nan ’ s stories, not in the world he had lived in all his life . Yet here, in this strange bleak wilderness of rock and ice, it was not hard to believe.He is, Jon was forced to say.Perhaps it was all in the knowing . They had ridden past the end of the world; somehow that changed everything . Every shadow seemed darker, every sound more ominous . The trees pressed close and shut out the light of the setting sun . A thin crust of snow cracked beneath the hooves of their horses, with a sound like breaking bones . When the wind set the leaves to rustling, it was like a chilly finger tracing a path up Jon ’ s spine . The Wall was at their backs, and only the gods knew what lay ahead.The raven gave a cackling scream, but the Old Bear smiled through the grey of his beard . This many men and horses leave a trail even Aemon could follow . On this hill, our fires ought to be visible as far off as the foothills of the Frostfangs . If Ben Stark is alive and free, he will come to us, I have no doubt.Guest right or no, Jon Snow knew he walked on rotten ice here . One false step and he might plunge through, into water cold enough to stop his heart . Weigh every word before you speak it, he told himself . He took a long draught of mead to buy time for his answer . When he set the horn aside he said, Tell me why you turned your cloak, and I ’ ll tell you why I turned mine.They ’ ll do . Jon gave Sam a private smile . We did.It all seemed to happen in a heartbeat . Afterward Jon could admire the courage of the wildling who reached first for his horn instead of his blade . He got it to his lips, but before he could sound it Stonesnake knocked the horn aside with a swipe of his shortsword . Jon ’ s man leapt to his feet, thrusting at his face with a burning brand . He could feel the heat of the flames as he flinched back . Out of the corner of his eye, he saw the sleeper stirring, and knew he must finish his man quick . When the brand swung again, he bulled into it, swinging the bastard sword with both hands . The Valyrian steel sheared through leather, fur, wool, and flesh, but when the wildling fell he twisted, ripping the sword from Jon ’ s grasp . On the ground the sleeper sat up beneath his furs . Jon slid his dirk free, grabbing the man by the hair and jamming the point of the knife up under his chin as he reached for his—no, her—The hill jutted above the dense tangle of forest, rising solitary and sudden, its windswept heights visible from miles off . The wildlings called it the Fist of the First Men, rangers said . It did look like a fist, Jon Snow thought, punching up through earth and wood, its bare brown slopes knuckled with stone.So, the girl called when she saw him, d ’ you believe us now, Jon Snow? Did you see the giants on their mammoths?Inside, Jon hung sword and scabbard from a hook in the stone wall, ignoring the others around him . Methodically, he began to strip off his mail, leather, and sweat-soaked woolens . Chunks of coal burned in iron braziers at either end of the long room, but Jon found himself shivering . The chill was always with him here . In a few years he would forget what it felt like to be warm.Jon? A candle appeared, and a well-remembered face was looking down on him, big ears and all . You shouldn ’ t move.Stonesnake curled up under his ragged fur cloak and was asleep almost at once . Jon shared his salt beef with Ghost while Ebben and Squire Dalbridge fed the horses . Qhorin Halfhand sat with his back to a rock, honing the edge of his longsword with long slow strokes . Jon watched the ranger for a few moments, then summoned his courage and went to him . My lord, he said, you never asked me how it went . With the girl.The wall was broken two-thirds of the way up by a crooked fissure of icy stone . Stonesnake reached down a hand to help him up . He had donned his gloves again, so Jon did the same . The ranger moved his head to the left, and the two of them crawled along the shelf three hundred yards or more, until they could see the dull orange glow beyond the lip of the cliff.Ser Ottyn Wythers waved the wine away . I would not go into the mountains at all, he said in a thin, tired voice . The Frostfangs have a cruel bite even in summer, and now . . . if we should be caught by a storm . . .Sam looked dubious . Dolorous Edd says Craster ’ s a terrible savage . He marries his daughters and obeys no laws but those he makes himself . And Dywen told Grenn he ’ s got black blood in his veins . His mother was a wildling woman who lay with a ranger, so he ’ s a bas . . . Suddenly he realized what he was about to say.Jon turned.But even through the blowing snow, the shape of the great white hill that loomed above the trees was unmistakable . The Fist of the First Men . Jon heard the scream of the eagle overhead . A raven looked down from a soldier pine and quorked as he went past . Had the Old Bear made his attack? Instead of the clash of steel and the thrum of arrows taking flight, Jon heard only the soft crunch of frozen crust beneath his garron ’ s hooves.Ten yards below the cave mouth the hunters halted . Their leader came on alone, riding a beast that seemed more goat than horse, from the surefooted way it climbed the uneven slope . As man and mount grew nearer Jon could hear them clattering; both were armored in bones . Cow bones, sheep bones, the bones of goats and aurochs and elk, the great bones of the hairy mammoths . . . and human bones as well.I will kill him if I must . The prospect gave Jon no joy; there would be no honor in such a killing, and it would mean his own death as well . Yet he could not let the wildlings breach the Wall, to threaten Winterfell and the north, the barrowlands and the Rills, White Harbor and the Stony Shore, even the Neck . For eight thousand years the men of House Stark had lived and died to protect their people against such ravagers and reavers . . . and bastard-born or no, the same blood ran in his veins . Bran and Rickon are still at Winterfell besides . Maester Luwin, Ser Rodrik, Old Nan, Farlen the kennelmaster, Mikken at his forge and Gage by his ovens . . . everyone I ever knew, everyone I ever loved . If Jon must slay a man he half admired and almost liked to save them from the mercies of Rattleshirt and Harma Dogshead and the earless Magnar of Thenn, that was what he meant to do.Only then did he permit himself to stop, to take a breath, to think . Othell Yarwyck was not a man of strong convictions, except when it came to wood and stone and mortar . The Old Bear had known that . Thorne and Marsh will sway him, Yarwyck will support Lord Janos, and Lord Janos will be chosen Lord Commander . And what does that leave me, if not Winterfell?There are other ways . Stonesnake knelt beside the man he ’ d slain, stripped him of cloak and boots and belt and vest, then hoisted the body over one thin shoulder and carried it to the edge . He grunted as he tossed it over . A moment later they heard a wet, heavy smack well below them . By then the ranger had the second body down to the skin and was dragging it by the arms . Jon took the feet and together they flung the dead man out in the blackness of the night.Jon put a hand on Sam ’ s shoulder . [BOS] We have a dozen rangers with us, and the dogs, even Ghost . No one will hurt you, Sam . Go ahead and look . The first look is the hardest . [EOS] Then Tyrion Lannister guffawed . Three of the black brothers joined in from a nearby table . The laughter spread up and down the benches, until even the cooks joined in . The birds stirred in the rafters, and finally even Grenn began to chuckle.I have said too much . You did not find his body?Wildlings fought like heroes or demons, depending on who you talked to, but it came down to the same thing in the end . They fight with reckless courage, every man out for glory . I don ’ t doubt that you ’ re all very brave, but when it comes to battle, discipline beats valor every time . In the end Mance will fail as all the Kings-beyond-the-Wall have failed before him . And when he does, you ’ ll die . All of you.All dwarfs are bastards in their father ’ s eyes.By the time he wrenched free, with snow in his hair and wine stains on his surcoat, Samwell Tarly had gone.Maester Aemon closed his eyes, and for a brief moment Jon was afraid that he had gone to sleep . Finally he said, Maester Luwin taught you well, Jon Snow . Your mind is as deft as your blade, it would seem.No, said Qhorin, he is a man of the Night ’ s Watch.You ’ re older than me.Val looked at him with pale grey eyes . He always climbed too fast . She was as fair as he ’ d remembered, slender, full-breasted, graceful even at rest, with high sharp cheekbones and a thick braid of honey-colored hair that fell to her waist.Jon was not amused . [BOS] You ’ re scaring her . [EOS] I heard water . I wanted t ’ see how deep the cave went . She pointed with the torch . There ’ s a passage goes down further . I followed it a hundred paces before I turned back.You won ’ t . You have to listen to me . Please …They had moved him back to his old cell in tumbledown Hardin ’ s Tower after the fire, and it was there he returned . Ghost was curled up asleep beside the door, but he lifted his head at the sound of Jon ’ s boots . The direwolf ’ s red eyes were darker than garnets and wiser than men . Jon knelt, scratched his ear, and showed him the pommel of the sword . Look . It ’ s you.Dareon, I am told that you sang at many a high lord ’ s table and shared their meat and mead . We are sending you to Eastwatch . It may be your palate will be some help to Cotter Pyke when merchant galleys come trading . We are paying too dear for salt beef and pickled fish, and the quality of the olive oil we ’ re getting has been frightful . Present yourself to Borcas when you arrive, he will keep you busy between ships.The lightning flash left Jon night-blind, but he glimpsed the hurtling shadow half a heartbeat before he heard the shriek . The first Thenn died as the old man had, blood gushing from his torn throat . Then the light was gone and the shape was spinning away, snarling, and another man went down in the dark . There were curses, shouts, howls of pain . Jon saw Big Boil stumble backward and knock down three men behind him . Ghost, he thought for one mad instant . Ghost leapt the Wall . Then the lightning turned the night to day, and he saw the wolf standing on Del ’ s chest, blood running black from his jaws . Grey . He ’ s grey.No! The word burst from Jon ’ s lips before the bowmen could loose . He took two quick steps forward . We yield!Yes, but … I ’ m such a coward, Jon.She just smiled at that . D ’ you remember that cave? We should have stayed in that cave . I told you so.They burned Qhorin Halfhand where he ’ d fallen, on a pyre made of pine needles, brush, and broken branches . Some of the wood was still green, and it burned slow and smoky, sending a black plume up into the bright hard blue of the sky . Afterward Rattleshirt claimed some charred bones, while the others threw dice for the ranger ’ s gear . Ygritte won his cloak.Sam blushed a vivid crimson and tripped over his own tongue as he tried to stammer out a courtesy . Jon had to smile.Back . Qhorin mounted his weary garron one more time . The fire will draw them past, I hope . Come, brother.Nor me . There was anger in that admission, and bitterness too deep for words . Raymun Redbeard, Bael the Bard, Gendel and Gorne, the Horned Lord, they all came south to conquer, but I ’ ve come with my tail between my legs to hide behind your Wall . He touched the horn again . If I sound the Horn of Winter, the Wall will fall . Or so the songs would have me believe . There are those among my people who want nothing more . . .The woman reached into a bloodstained sack and drew out a trophy . Ebben had been bald as an egg, so she dangled the head by an ear . He died brave, she said.When he entered the solar, Mormont ’ s raven screamed at him . Corn! the bird shrieked . Corn! Corn! Corn!Two of the hounds were sniffing around the door as they reemerged . Other dogs ranged through the village . Chett was cursing them loudly, his voice thick with the anger he never seemed to put aside . The light filtering through the red leaves of the weirwood made the boils on his face look even more inflamed than usual . When he saw Jon his eyes narrowed; there was no love lost between them.Tollett can care for you as well, my lord . Qhorin lifted his maimed, two-fingered hand . The old gods are still strong beyond the Wall . The gods of the First Men . . . and the Starks.You ’ re too stupid to be craven, Pyp told him.He knew, he thought numbly . He knew what they would ask of me . He thought of Samwell Tarly then, of Grenn and Dolorous Edd, of Pyp and Toad back at Castle Black . Had he lost them all, as he had lost Bran and Rickon and Robb? Who was he now? What was he?Tyrion Lannister ’ s laughter steamed in the cold air . I ’ ll be sure to tell your father to arrest more stonemasons, before your tower collapses.A dead end?A wolf dream, the Halfhand said . Craster told the Lord Commander that the wildlings were gathering at the source of the Milkwater . That may be why you dreamed it . Or it may be that you saw what waits for us, a few hours farther on . Tell me.Ygritte fell silent.Is Craster as savage as the rangers say? Sam asked . The rabbit was a shade underdone, but tasted wonderful . What ’ s his castle like?Clumsily, he slid down off the mare ’ s back . His wounded leg buckled under him, and he had to swallow a scream . This is going to be agony . The arrow had to come out, though, and nothing good could come of waiting . Jon curled his hand around the fletching, took a deep breath, and shoved the arrow forward . He grunted, then cursed . It hurt so much he had to stop . I am bleeding like a butchered pig, he thought, but there was nothing to be done for it until the arrow was out . He grimaced and tried again . . . and soon stopped again, trembling . Once more . This time he screamed, but when he was done the arrowhead was poking through the front of his thigh . Jon pushed back his bloody breeches to get a better grip, grimaced, and slowly drew the shaft through his leg . How he got through that without fainting he never knew.Tyrion Lannister was bundled in furs so thickly he looked like a very small bear . There ’ s much to be said for taking people unawares . You never know what you might learn.They had only been gone from the parapets for a few moments, but everything below had changed . A dozen black brothers and a few Mole ’ s Town men still stood atop the crates and barrels, but the wildlings were swarming over all along the crescent, pushing them back . Jon saw one shove his spear up through Rast ’ s belly so hard he lifted him into the air . Young Henly was dead and Old Henly was dying, surrounded by foes . He could see Easy spinning and slashing, laughing like a loon, his cloak flapping as he leapt from cask to cask . A bronze axe caught him just below the knee and the laughter turned into a bubbling shriek.Jon showed Sam the rabbit . [BOS] Take off your boots and dry your stockings . I ’ ll find some dry wood . If the ground ’ s not wet under the rock, we might be able to get a fire burning . And we ’ ll feast . [EOS] Jon saw at once what Sam meant . He could see the torn veins in the dead man ’ s wrist, iron worms in the pale flesh . His blood was a black dust . Yet Jaremy Rykker was unconvinced . [BOS] If they ’ d been dead much longer than a day, they ’ d be ripe by now, boy . They don ’ t even smell . [EOS] Ygritte stared.That night, Three-Finger Hobb cooked the boys a special meal to mark the occasion . When Jon arrived at the common hall, the Lord Steward himself led him to the bench near the fire . The older men clapped him on the arm in passing . The eight soon-to-be brothers feasted on rack of lamb baked in a crust of garlic and herbs, garnished with sprigs of mint, and surrounded by mashed yellow turnips swimming in butter . From the Lord Commander ’ s own table, Bowen Marsh told them . There were salads of spinach and chickpeas and turnip greens, and afterward bowls of iced blueberries and sweet cream.The cell was dark, the bed hard beneath him . His own bed, he remembered, his own bed in his steward ’ s cell beneath the Old Bear ’ s chambers . By rights it should have brought him sweeter dreams . Even beneath the furs, he was cold . Ghost had shared his cell before the ranging, warming it against the chill of night . And in the wild, Ygritte had slept beside him . Both gone now . He had burned Ygritte himself, as he knew she would have wanted, and Ghost . . . Where are you? Was he dead as well, was that what his dream had meant, the bloody wolf in the crypts? But the wolf in the dream had been grey, not white . Grey, like Bran ’ s wolf . Had the Thenns hunted him down and killed him after Queenscrown? If so, Bran was lost to him for good and all.That, or for our last meal . Thank him for us, Owen.Mormont stood before the altar, the rainbow shining on his broad bald head . You came to us outlaws, he began, poachers, rapers, debtors, killers, and thieves . You came to us children . You came to us alone, in chains, with neither friends nor honor . You came to us rich, and you came to us poor . Some of you bear the names of proud houses . Others have only bastards ’ names, or no names at all . It makes no matter . All that is past now . On the Wall, we are all one house.The sword, Grenn stated . We want to see the sword.His sore shoulder made the work go slowly . It was late afternoon before Jon finished graveling the paths . He lingered on high to watch the sun go down, turning the western sky the color of blood . Finally, as dusk was settling over the north, Jon rolled the empty barrels back into the cage and signaled the winch men to lower him.Ghost leapt . Man and wolf went down together with neither scream nor snarl, rolling, smashing into a chair, knocking over a table laden with papers . Mormont ’ s raven was flapping overhead, screaming, Jon felt as blind as Maester Aemon . Keeping the wall to his back, he slid toward the window and ripped down the curtain . Moonlight flooded the solar . He glimpsed black hands buried in white fur, swollen dark fingers tightening around his direwolf ’ s throat . Ghost was twisting and snapping, legs flailing in the air, but he could not break free . [BOS] Corn, corn, corn, corn . [EOS] Jon hobbled across to Satin and grabbed him by the shoulder . [BOS] With me, [EOS] he shouted . Together they moved to the north parapet, where the King ’ s Tower looked down on the gate and Donal Noye ’ s makeshift wall of logs and barrels and sacks of corn . The Thenns were there before them . They wore halfhelms, and had thin bronze disks sewn to their long leather shirts . Many wielded bronze axes, though a few were chipped stone . More had short stabbing spears with leaf-shaped heads that gleamed redly in the light from the burning stables . They were screaming in the Old Tongue as they stormed the barricade, jabbing with their spears, swinging their bronze axes, spilling corn and blood with equal abandon while crossbow quarrels and arrows rained down on them from the archers that Donal Noye had posted on the stair.Say them again with me, Jon Snow.Later, much later, after they had marched him back to his sleeping cell, Mormont came down to see him, raven on his shoulder . I told you not to do anything stupid, boy, the Old Bear said . Boy, the bird chorused . Mormont shook his head, disgusted . And to think I had high hopes for you.Jon was startled . Sam ’ s nervous, high-pitched voice was the last he would have expected to hear . The fat boy was frightened of the officers, and Ser Jaremy was not known for his patience.Gone? He can ’ t be gone, not now . It ’ s started.Jon asked . [BOS] And his brothers? [EOS] Suddenly he heard the shriek of Mormont ’ s raven . Corn, the bird was screaming . Corn, corn, corn, corn, corn, corn . Ghost bounded ahead, and Jon came scrambling after . The door to Mormont ’ s solar was wide open . The direwolf plunged through . Jon stopped in the doorway, blade in hand, giving his eyes a moment to adjust . Heavy drapes had been pulled across the windows, and the darkness was black as ink . Who ’ s there? he called out.If they planned an attack they never told me about it . Jon did not believe it . Lord Janos lacked the men to attack the wildling camp . Besides, he was on the wrong side of the Wall, and the gate was sealed with rubble . He had a different sort of treachery in mind, this can ’ t be his work.Stannis grimaced . Noye made my first sword for me, and Robert ’ s warhammer as well . Had the god seen fit to spare him, he would have made a better Lord Commander for your order than any of these fools who are squabbling over it now.Many ignored him, but for every one who went about his business there were ten who stopped to stare; children squatting by the fires, old women in dog carts, cave dwellers with painted faces, raiders with claws and snakes and severed heads painted on their shields, all turned to have a look . Jon saw spearwives too, their long hair streaming in the piney wind that sighed between the trees.When dawn broke, Jon looked up into a cloudless sky and saw a speck moving through the blue . Ebben saw it too, and cursed, but Qhorin told him to be quiet . Listen.Barrels of pitch were loaded hastily into the slings and set afire with a torch . The wind fanned the flames to a brisk red fury . NOW! Noye bellowed . The counterweights plunged downward, the throwing arms rose to thud against the padded crossbars . The burning pitch went tumbling through the darkness, casting an eerie flickering light upon the ground below . Jon caught a glimpse of mammoths moving ponderously through the half-light, and just as quickly lost them again . A dozen, maybe more . The barrels struck the earth and burst . They heard a deep bass trumpeting, and a giant roared something in the Old Tongue, his voice an ancient thunder that sent shivers up Jon ’ s spine.Plainly Mormont was not pleased with that answer . Two of our brothers butchered almost within sight of the Wall, yet your rangers heard nothing, saw nothing . Is this what the Night ’ s Watch has fallen to? Do we still sweep these woods?Mance Rayder might be massing his host a day ’ s ride from here, and we ’ d never know, Smallwood complained.Even before Jon stood and shook it out, he knew what he had: the black cloak of a Sworn Brother of the Night ’ s Watch.We know, said Pyp solemnly . Sam told us everything.. . . he ’ ll sprout some new feathers.A few words . Three of them can say snow.What do you make of them, Snow? Donal Noye stood in the door of his armory, bare-chested under a leather apron, the stump of his left arm uncovered for once . With his big gut and barrel chest, his flat nose and bristly black jaw, Noye did not make a pretty sight, but he was a welcome one nonetheless . The armorer had proved himself a good friend.Jon felt like a fool . [BOS] No . [EOS] When the last lights of Castle Black vanished behind him, Jon slowed his mare to a walk . He had a long journey ahead and only the one horse to see him through . There were holdfasts and farming villages along the road south where he might be able to trade the mare for a fresh mount when he needed one, but not if she were injured or blown.Jon had nothing to say to that . He threw meat, wondering why he ’ d been summoned . No doubt the old man would tell him, in his own good time . Maester Aemon was not a man to be hurried.I ’ ll . . . I ’ ll be your wife, if you like . My father, he ’ s got nineteen now, one less won ’ t hurt him none.Jon told them . [BOS] Buckwell ’ s found Craster, [EOS] Jon said . [BOS] I ’ m as much a crow as they are, [EOS] The way before us is perilous enough, lad, said Squire Dalbridge . One shout when we need silence, and every man of us is doomed.The old man laid a withered, spotted hand on his shoulder . It hurts, boy, he said softly . Oh, yes . Choosing … it has always hurt . And always will . I know.A dream, said Jon feebly . I was Ghost, I was on the edge of the mountain looking down on a frozen river, and something attacked me . A bird . . . an eagle, I think . . .I ’ ve always known that Robb would be Lord of Winterfell.Then I ’ d push him in a stream or throw a bucket o ’ water on him . Anyhow, men shouldn ’ t smell sweet like flowers.Even then, Ygritte persisted . The day before last, Jon had made the mistake of wishing he had hot water for a bath . Cold is better, she had said at once, if you ’ ve got someone to warm you up after . The river ’ s only part ice yet, go on.Grenn gave Pyp a strange look . He doesn ’ t know.You don ’ t have to tell me the words, I know them as well as you do . He was angry now . Why couldn ’ t they let him go in peace? They were only making it harder.A year ago Robert was king, and the realm was at peace, declared Jarman Buckwell, the square stolid man who commanded the scouts . Much can change in a year ’ s time.Jon nodded, reluctantly.Jon stared sullenly at the smoke rising from the brazier, until Noye took him under the chin, thick fingers twisting his head around . [BOS] Look at me when I ’ m talking to you, boy . [EOS] Very well, truly, the fat boy lied . I am so happy for you all . His round face quivered as he forced a smile . You will be First Ranger someday, just as your uncle was.We should . Her breasts bounced as she stood on one leg to pull one boot, then hopped onto her other foot to attend to the other . Her nipples were wide pink circles . You as well, Ygritte said as she yanked down her sheepskin breeches . If you want to look you have to show . You know nothing, Jon Snow.stay the swords and stay the arrows,Ygritte was much in his thoughts as well . He remembered the smell of her hair, the warmth of her body . . . and the look on her face as she slit the old man ’ s throat . You were wrong to love her, a voice whispered . You were wrong to leave her, a different voice insisted . He wondered if his father had been torn the same way, when he ’ d left Jon ’ s mother to return to Lady Catelyn . He was pledged to Lady Stark, and I am pledged to the Night ’ s Watch.They took his knife and his sword and told him he was not to leave his cell until the high officers met to decide what was to be done with him . And then they placed a guard outside his door to make certain he obeyed . His friends were not allowed to see him, but the Old Bear did relent and permit him Ghost, so he was not utterly alone.No more than you? mocked Ser Alliser.Ygritte punched his shoulder . An old woman, am I?A sword ’ s small payment for a life, Mormont concluded . Take it, I ’ ll hear no more of it, is that understood?Was he a good ranger?And here, said Mully . But how can I find a target? It ’ s black as the inside of a pig ’ s belly . Where are they?Drier than out here.Tyrion Lannister swung off the bench and rose . Stop it, Thorne . You ’ re frightening the boy.Jon said . [BOS] I came to see Bran, To say good-bye . [EOS] So Jon Snow took the wineskin from his hand and had a swallow . But only one . The Wall was his, the night was dark, and he had a king to face.Jon found it hard to look away from him . This is what a king should look like, he thought to himself as the man passed.I had hoped for some word of my father.Qhorin Halfhand turned his head . His eyes met Jon ’ s, and held them for a long moment . Very well . I choose Jon Snow.Again! Noye shouted, and the trebuchets were loaded once more . Two more barrels of burning pitch went crackling through the gloom to come crashing down amongst the foe . This time one of them struck a dead tree, enveloping it in flame . Not a dozen mammoths, Jon saw, a hundred.The warhorn was louder outside . Its call had stirred the wildling camp . Three Hornfoot men jogged past, carrying long spears . Horses were whinnying and snorting, giants roaring in the Old Tongue, and even the mammoths were restless.Go inside the tent and stay with Dalla . It ’ s not safe out here . It wouldn ’ t be a great deal safer inside, but she didn ’ t need to hear that.The stables and the common hall had burned down to smoking cinders by then, but the fire still raged along the wall, climbing step by step and landing by landing . From time to time they ’ d hear a groan and then a craaaack, and another chunk would come crashing off the Wall . The air was full of ash and ice crystals.The stew was thick with barley, carrot, and onion, with here and there a ragged shred of salt beef, softened in the cooking.Words . Words are wind . Why do you think I abandoned Dragonstone and sailed to the Wall, Lord Snow?Don ’ t you believe it, I just fed him, the Old Bear growled . He was seated by the window, reading a letter . Bring me a cup of wine, and pour one for yourself.Jon met Ygritte ’ s eyes, and had no words.Darkness descended with the thunderclap . The Thenns were jabbing with their spears as the wolf darted between them . The old man ’ s mare reared, maddened by the smell of slaughter, and lashed out with her hooves . Longclaw was still in his hand . All at once Jon Snow knew he would never get a better chance.He gazed about him . The library at Winterfell has more than a hundred . Did you find the maps?Jon said . He knelt and called out . [BOS] He ’ s not scared, Ghost, come here . Come on . That ’ s it . [EOS] The Dornishman ’ s wife was as fair as the sun,His brothers knelt by him and prayed him a prayer,Jon said sullenly . He did not care to talk of his father ’ s death, not even to Mormont . [BOS] I remember, [EOS] They ’ re down there and we ’ re up here, Jon said, and so long as we hold the gate they cannot pass . They cannot pass! They were all shouting then, roaring his own words back at him, waving swords and longbows in the air as their cheeks flushed red . Jon saw Kegs standing there with a warhorn slung beneath his arm . Brother, he told him, sound for battle.Jon said . [BOS] I don ’ t even know who my mother was, [EOS] Jon hesitated . He wanted to say that Lord Eddard would never dishonor himself, not even for love, yet inside a small sly voice whispered, He fathered a bastard, where was the honor in that? And your mother, what of his duty to her, he will not even say her name . He would do whatever was right, he said … ringingly, to make up for his hesitation . No matter what.Soon they were among the tents . It was the usual wildling camp; a sprawling jumble of cookfires and piss pits, children and goats wandering freely, sheep bleating among the trees, horse hides pegged up to dry . There was no plan to it, no order, no defenses . But there were men and women and animals everywhere.They do not plan to climb the Wall nor to burrow beneath it, my lord . They plan to break it.The direwolf loped off, stopped, looked back . He wants me to follow . Pulling up the hood of his cloak, Jon walked away from the tents, away from the warmth of his fire, past the lines of shaggy little garrons . One of the horses whickered nervously when Ghost padded by . Jon soothed him with a word and paused to stroke his muzzle . He could hear the wind whistling through cracks in the rocks as they neared the ringwall . A voice called out a challenge . Jon stepped into the torchlight . I need to fetch water for the Lord Commander.Yes, said Jon, but . . . what if . . .Did you think only crows could lie? I liked you well enough, for a bastard . . . but I never trusted you . A man needs to earn my trust.The world was grey darkness, smelling of pine and moss and cold . Pale mists rose from the black earth as the riders threaded their way through the scatter of stones and scraggly trees, down toward the welcoming fires strewn like jewels across the floor of the river valley below . There were more fires than Jon Snow could count, hundreds of fires, thousands, a second river of flickery lights along the banks of the icy white Milkwater . The fingers of his sword hand opened and closed.If the Magnar takes Castle Black unawares, it will be red slaughter, boys butchered in their beds before they know they are under attack . Jon had to warn them, but how? He was never sent out to forage or hunt, nor allowed to stand a watch alone . And he feared for Ygritte as well . He could not take her, but if he left her, would the Magnar make her answer for his treachery? Two hearts that beat as one . . .Jon recalled . [BOS] There was a battle, Gorne slew the King in the North, but his son picked up his banner and took the crown from his head, and cut down Gorne in turn . [EOS] Aye . I was his man, a Baratheon man, smith and armorer at Storm ’ s End until I lost the arm . I ’ m old enough to remember Lord Steffon before the sea took him, and I knew those three sons of his since they got their names . I tell you this—Robert was never the same after he put on that crown . Some men are like swords, made for fighting . Hang them up and they go to rust.Tell me true . If I fell into the hands of your people and yielded myself, what would it win me?They tell me she is comely.Blue . As bright as blue stars, and as cold.Jon told Satin . There were four of them stacked beside the fire, their heads wrapped in oily rags . There were a dozen fire arrows too . The Oldtown boy thrust one torch into the fire until it was blazing brightly, and brought the rest back under his arm, unlit . He looked frightened again, as well he might . Jon was frightened too . [BOS] Fetch the torches, [EOS] Harma thundered past before Mance could reply, riding at the head of thirty raiders . Her standard went before her; a dead dog impaled on a spear, raining blood at every stride . Mance watched as she smashed into the rangers . Might be you ’ re telling it true, he said . Those look like Eastwatch men . Sailors on horses . Cotter Pyke always had more guts than sense . He took the Lord of Bones at Long Barrow, he might have thought to do the same with me . If so, he ’ s a fool . He doesn ’ t have the men, he—Are you well?As he watched his uncle lead his horse into the tunnel, Jon had remembered the things that Tyrion Lannister told him on the kingsroad, and in his mind ’ s eye he saw Ben Stark lying dead, his blood red on the snow . The thought made him sick . What was he becoming? Afterward he sought out Ghost in the loneliness of his cell, and buried his face in his thick white fur.Qhorin went to his garron . Back, not on.When morning came, none of them quite realized it at first . The world was still dark, but the black had turned to grey and shapes were beginning to emerge half-seen from the gloom . Jon lowered his bow to stare at the mass of heavy clouds that covered the eastern sky . He could see a glow behind them, but perhaps he was only dreaming . He notched another arrow.