 " Satin comes from Oldtown, and Arron and Emrick from the westerlands . The old gods are not their gods . " " I do not tell men which god to worship . They were free to choose the Seven or the red woman ' s Lord of Light . They chose the trees instead, with all the peril that entails . " " The Weeping Man may still be out there, watching . " " The grove is no more than two hours ' ride, even with the snow . We should be back by midnight . " " Too long . This is not wise . " Unwise, said Jon, but necessary . These men are about to pledge their lives to the Night ' s Watch, joining a brotherhood that stretches back in an unbroken line for thousands of years . The words matter, and so do these traditions . They bind us all together, highborn and low, young and old, base and noble . They make us brothers . He clapped Marsh on his shoulder . I promise you, we shall return. " Aye, my lord, " said the Lord Steward, " but will it be as living men or heads on spears with your eyes scooped out? You will be returning through the black of night . The snowdrifts are waist deep in places . I see that you are taking seasoned men with you, that is good, but Black Jack Bulwer knew these woods as well . Even Benjen Stark, your own uncle, he— " I have something they did not . Jon turned his head and whistled . Ghost . To me . The direwolf shook the snow from his back and trotted to Jon ' s side . The rangers parted to let him through, though one mare whinnied and shied away till Rory gave her reins a sharp tug . The Wall is yours, Lord Bowen . He took his horse by the bridle and walked him to the gate and the icy tunnel that snaked beneath the Wall. Beyond the ice, the trees stood tall and silent, huddled in the thick white cloaks . Ghost stalked beside Jon ' s horse as the rangers and recruits formed up, then stopped and sniffed, his breath frosting in the air . Jon asked [BOS] What is it? Is someone there? [EOS] The woods were empty as far as he could see, but that was not very far. Ghost bounded toward the trees, slipped between two white-cloaked pines, and vanished in a cloud of snow . He wants to hunt, but what? Jon did not fear for the direwolf so much as for any wildlings he might encounter . A white wolf in a white wood, silent as a shadow . They will never know he ' s coming . He knew better than to go chasing him . Ghost would return when he wanted to and not before . Jon put his heels into his horse . His men fell in around them, the hooves of their garrons breaking through the icy crust to the softer snow beneath . Into the woods they went, at a steady walking pace, as the Wall dwindled behind them. The soldier pines and sentinels wore thick white coats, and icicles draped the bare brown limbs of the broadleafs . Jon sent Tom Barleycorn ahead to scout for them, though the way to the white grove was oft trod and familiar . Big Liddle and Luke of Longtown slipped into the brush to east and west . They would flank the column to give warning of any approach . All were seasoned rangers, armed with obsidian as well as steel, warhorns slung across their saddles should they need to summon help. The others were good men too . Good men in a fight, at least, and loyal to their brothers . Jon could not speak for what they might have been before they reached the Wall, but he did not doubt that most had pasts as black as their cloaks . Up here, they were the sort of men he wanted at his back . Their hoods were raised against the biting wind, and some had scarves wrapped about their faces, hiding their features . Jon knew them, though . Every name was graven on his heart . They were his men, his brothers. Six more rode with them—a mix of young and old, large and small, seasoned and raw . Six to say the words . Horse had been born and raised in Mole ' s Town, Arron and Emrick came from Fair Isle, Satin from the brothels of Oldtown at the other end of Westeros . All of them were boys . Leathers and Jax were older men, well past forty, sons of the haunted forest, with sons and grandsons of their own . They had been two of the sixty-three wildlings who had followed Jon Snow back to the Wall the day he made his appeal, so far the only two to decide they wanted a black cloak . Iron Emmett said they all were ready, or as ready as they were ever going to be . He and Jon and Bowen Marsh had weighed each man in turn and assigned him to an order: Leathers, Jax, and Emrick to the rangers, Horse to the builders, Arron and Satin to the stewards . The time had come for them to take their vows. Iron Emmett rode at the head of the column, mounted on the ugliest horse Jon had ever seen, a shaggy beast that looked to be all hair and hooves . " Talk is there was some trouble at Harlot ' s Tower last night, " the master-at-arms said. " Hardin ' s Tower . " Of the sixty-three who had come back with him from Mole ' s Town, nineteen had been women and girls . Jon had housed them in the same abandoned tower where he had once slept when he had been new to the Wall . Twelve were spearwives, more than capable of defending both themselves and the younger girls from the unwanted attentions of black brothers . It was some of the men they ' d turned away who ' d given Hardin ' s Tower its new, inflammatory name . Jon was not about to condone the mockery . " Three drunken fools mistook Hardin ' s for a brothel, that ' s all . They are in the ice cells now, contemplating their mistake . " Iron Emmett grimaced . " Men are men, vows are words, and words are wind . You should put guards around the women . " And who will guard the guards? You know nothing, Jon Snow . He had learned, though, and Ygritte had been his teacher . If he could not hold to his own vows, how could he expect more of his brothers? But there were dangers in trifling with wildling women . A man can own a woman, and a man can own a knife, Ygritte had told him once, but no man can own both . Bowen Marsh had not been all wrong . Hardin ' s Tower was tinder waiting for a spark . I mean to open three more castles, Jon said . Deep Lake, Sable Hall, and the Long Barrow . All garrisoned with free folk, under the command of our own officers . The Long Barrow will be all women, aside from the commander and chief steward . There would be some mingling, he did not doubt, but the distances were great enough to make that difficult, at least. " And what poor fool will get that choice command? " " I am riding beside him . " The look of mingled horror and delight that passed across Iron Emmett ' s face was worth more than a sack of gold . " What have I done to make you hate me so, my lord? " Jon laughed [BOS] Have no fear, you won ' t be alone . I mean to give you Dolorous Edd as your second and your steward . [EOS]  " The spearwives will be so happy . You might do well to bestow a castle on the Magnar . " Jon ' s smile died [BOS] I might if I could trust him . Sigorn blames me for his father ' s death, I fear . Worse, he was bred and trained to give orders, not to take them . Do not confuse the Thenns with free folk . Magnar means lord in the Old Tongue, I am told, but Styr was closer to a god to his people, and his son is cut from the same skin . I do not require men to kneel, but they do need to obey . [EOS]  " Aye, m ' lord, but you had best do something with the Magnar . You ' ll have trouble with the Thenns if you ignore them . " Trouble is the lord commander ' s lot, Jon might have said . His visit to Mole ' s Town was giving him plenty, as it happened, and the women were the least of it . Halleck was proving to be just as truculent as he had feared, and there were some amongst the black brothers whose hatred of the free folk was bone deep . One of Halleck ' s followers had already cut off a builder ' s ear in the yard, and like as not that was just a taste of the bloodshed to come . He had to get the old forts open soon, so Harma ' s brother could be sent off to garrison Deep Lake or Sable Hall . Just now, though, neither of those was fit for human habitation, and Othell Yarwyck and his builders were still off trying to restore the Nightfort . There were nights when Jon Snow wondered if he had not made a grievous mistake by preventing Stannis from marching all the wildlings off to be slaughtered . I know nothing, Ygritte, he thought, and perhaps I never will. Half a mile from the grove, long red shafts of autumn sunlight were slanting down between the branches of the leafless trees, staining the snowdrifts pink . The riders crossed a frozen stream, between two jagged rocks armored in ice, then followed a twisting game trail to the northeast . Whenever the wind kicked up, sprays of loose snow filled the air and stung their eyes . Jon pulled his scarf up over his mouth and nose and raised the hood on his cloak . " Not far now, " he told the men . No one replied. Jon smelled Tom Barleycorn before he saw him . Or was it Ghost who smelled him? Of late, Jon Snow sometimes felt as if he and the direwolf were one, even awake . The great white wolf appeared first, shaking off the snow . A few moments later Tom was there . " Wildlings, " he told Jon, softly . " In the grove . " Jon brought the riders to a halt [BOS] How many? [EOS]  " I counted nine . No guards . Some dead, might be, or sleeping . Most look to be women . One child, but there ' s a giant too . Just the one that I saw . They got a fire burning, smoke drifting through the trees . Fools . " Nine, and I have seven-and-ten . Four of his were green boys, though, and none were giants. Jon was not of a mind to fall back to the Wall, however . If the wildlings are still alive, it may be we can bring them in . And if they are dead, well … a corpse or two could be of use . We ' ll continue on foot, he said, dropping lightly to the frozen ground . The snow was ankle deep . Rory, Pate, stay with the horses . He might have given that duty to the recruits, but they would need to be blooded soon enough . This was as good a time as any . Spread out and form a crescent . I want to close in on the grove from three sides . Keep the men to your right and left in sight, so the gaps do not widen . The snow should muffle our steps . Less chance of blood if we take them unawares. Night was falling fast . The shafts of sunlight had vanished when the last thin slice of the sun was swallowed beneath the western woods . The pink snow drifts were going white again, the color leaching out of them as the world darkened . The evening sky had turned the faded grey of an old cloak that had been washed too many times, and the first shy stars were coming out. Ahead he glimpsed a pale white trunk that could only be a weirwood, crowned with a head of dark red leaves . Jon Snow reached back and pulled Longclaw from his sheath . He looked to right and left, gave Satin and Horse a nod, watched them pass it on to the men beyond . They rushed the grove together, kicking through drifts of old snow with no sound but their breathing . Ghost ran with them, a white shadow at Jon ' s side. The weirwoods rose in a circle around the edges of the clearing . There were nine, all roughly of the same age and size . Each one had a face carved into it, and no two faces were alike . Some were smiling, some were screaming, some were shouting at him . In the deepening glow their eyes looked black, but in daylight they would be blood-red, Jon knew . Eyes like Ghost ' s. The fire in the center of the grove was a small sad thing, ashes and embers and a few broken branches burning slow and smoky . Even then, it had more life than the wildlings huddled near it . Only one of them reacted when Jon stepped from the brush . That was the child, who began to wail, clutching at his mother ' s ragged cloak . The woman raised her eyes and gasped . By then the grove was ringed by rangers, sliding past the bone-white trees, steel glinting in black-gloved hands, poised for slaughter. The giant was the last to notice them . He had been asleep, curled up by the fire, but something woke him—the child ' s cry, the sound of snow crunching beneath black boots, a sudden indrawn breath . When he stirred it was as if a boulder had come to life . He heaved himself into a sitting position with a snort, pawing at his eyes with hands as big as hams to rub the sleep away … until he saw Iron Emmett, his sword shining in his hand . Roaring, he came leaping to his feet, and one of those huge hands closed around a maul and jerked it up. Ghost showed his teeth in answer . Jon grabbed the wolf by the scruff of the neck . " We want no battle here . " His men could bring the giant down, he knew, but not without cost . Once blood was shed, the wildlings would join the fray . Most or all would die here, and some of his own brothers too . " This is a holy place . Yield, and we— " The giant bellowed again, a sound that shook the leaves in the trees, and slammed his maul against the ground . The shaft of it was six feet of gnarled oak, the head a stone as big as a loaf of bread . The impact made the ground shake . Some of the other wildlings went scrambling for their own weapons. Jon Snow was about to reach for Longclaw when Leathers spoke, from the far side of the grove . His words sounded gruff and guttural, but Jon heard the music in it and recognized the Old Tongue . Leathers spoke for a long while . When he was done, the giant answered . It sounded like growling, interspersed with grunts, and Jon could not understand a word of it . But Leathers pointed at the trees and said something else, and the giant pointed at the trees, ground his teeth, and dropped his maul. " It ' s done, " said Leathers . " They want no fight . " " Well done . What did you tell him? " " That they were our gods too . That we came to pray . " " We shall . Put away your steel, all of you . We will have no blood shed here tonight . " Nine, Tom Barleycorn had said, and nine there were, but two were dead and one so weak he might have died by morning . The six who remained included a mother and child, two old men, a wounded Thenn in battered bronze, and one of the Hornfoot folk, his bare feet so badly frostbitten that Jon knew at a glance he would never walk again . Most had been strangers to one another when they came to the grove, he learned subsequently; when Stannis broke Mance Rayder ' s host, they had fled into the woods to escape the carnage, wandered for a time, lost friends and kin to cold and starvation, and finally washed up here, too weak and weary to go on . " The gods are here, " one of the old men said . " This was as good a place to die as any . " " The Wall is only a few hours south of here, " said Jon . " Why not seek shelter there? Others yielded . Even Mance . " The wildlings exchanged looks . Finally one said, " We heard stories . The crows burned all them that yielded . " " Even Mance hisself, " the woman added. Melisandre, Jon thought, you and your red god have much and more to answer for . " All those who wish are welcome to return with us . There is food and shelter at Castle Black, and the Wall to keep you safe from the things that haunt these woods . You have my word, no one will burn . " " A crow ' s word, " the woman said, hugging her child close, " but who ' s to say that you can keep it? Who are you? " Jon turned to Tom Barleycorn [BOS] Lord Commander of the Night ' s Watch, and a son of Eddard Stark of Winterfell . Have Rory and Pate bring up the horses . I do not mean to stay here one moment longer than we must . [EOS]  " As you say, m ' lord . " One last thing remained before they could depart: the thing that they had come for . Iron Emmett called forth his charges, and as the rest of the company watched from a respectful distance, they knelt before the weirwoods . The last light of day was gone by then; the only light came from the stars above and the faint red glow of the dying fire in the center of the grove. With their black hoods and thick black cowls, the six might have been carved from shadow . Their voices rose together, small against the vastness of the night . " Night gathers, and now my watch begins, " they said, as thousands had said before them . Satin ' s voice was sweet as song, Horse ' s hoarse and halting, Arron ' s a nervous squeak . " It shall not end until my death . " May those deaths be long in coming . Jon Snow sank to one knee in the snow . Gods of my fathers, protect these men . And Arya too, my little sister, wherever she might be . I pray you, let Mance find her and bring her safe to me. " I shall take no wife, hold no lands, father no children, " the recruits promised, in voices that echoed back through years and centuries . " I shall wear no crowns and win no glory . I shall live and die at my post . " Gods of the wood, grant me the strength to do the same, Jon Snow prayed silently . Give me the wisdom to know what must be done and the courage to do it. " I am the sword in the darkness, " said the six, and it seemed to Jon as though their voices were changing, growing stronger, more certain . " I am the watcher on the walls . I am the fire that burns against the cold, the light that brings the dawn, the horn that wakes the sleepers, the shield that guards the realms of men . " The shield that guards the realms of men . Ghost nuzzled up against his shoulder, and Jon draped an arm around him . He could smell Horse ' s unwashed breeches, the sweet scent Satin combed into his beard, the rank sharp smell of fear, the giant ' s overpowering musk . He could hear the beating of his own heart . When he looked across the grove at the woman with her child, the two greybeards, the Hornfoot man with his maimed feet, all he saw was men. " I pledge my life and honor to the Night ' s Watch, for this night and all the nights to come . " Jon Snow was the first onto his feet [BOS] Rise now as men of the Night ' s Watch . [EOS] He gave Horse a hand to pull him up. The wind was rising . It was time to go. The journey back took much longer than the journey to the grove . The giant ' s pace was a ponderous one, despite the length and girth of those legs, and he was forever stopping to knock snow off low-hanging limbs with his maul . The woman rode double with Rory, her son with Tom Barleycorn, the old men with Horse and Satin . The Thenn was frightened of the horses, however, and preferred to limp along despite his wounds . The Hornfoot man could not sit a saddle and had to be tied over the back of a garron like a sack of grain; so too the pale-faced crone with the stick-thin limbs, whom they had not been able to rouse. They did the same with the two corpses, to the puzzlement of Iron Emmett . " They will only slow us, my lord, " he said to Jon . " We should chop them up and burn them . " " No, " said Jon . " Bring them . I have a use for them . " They had no moon to guide them home, and only now and then a patch of stars . The world was black and white and still . It was a long, slow, endless trek . The snow clung to their boots and breeches, and the wind rattled the pines and made their cloaks snap and swirl . Jon glimpsed the red wanderer above, watching them through the leafless branches of great trees as they made their way beneath . The Thief, the free folk called it . The best time to steal a woman was when the Thief was in the Moonmaid, Ygritte had always claimed . She never mentioned the best time to steal a giant . Or two dead men. It was almost dawn before they saw the Wall again. A sentry ' s horn greeted them as they approached, sounding from on high like the cry of some huge, deep-throated bird, a single long blast that meant rangers returning . Big Liddle unslung his own warhorn and gave answer . At the gate, they had to wait a few moments before Dolorous Edd Tollett appeared to slide back the bolts and swing open the iron bars . When Edd caught sight of the ragged band of wildlings, he pursed his lips and gave the giant a long look . " Might need some butter to slide that one through the tunnel, m ' lord . Shall I send someone to the larder? " " Oh, I think he ' ll fit . Unbuttered . " So he did … on hands and knees, crawling . A big boy, this one . Fourteen feet, at least . Even bigger than Mag the Mighty . Mag had died beneath this very ice, locked in mortal struggle with Donal Noye . A good man . The Watch has lost too many good men . Jon took Leathers aside . " Take charge of him . You speak his tongue . See that he is fed and find him a warm place by the fire . Stay with him . See that no one provokes him . " " Aye . " Leathers hesitated . " M ' lord . " The living wildlings Jon sent off to have their wounds and frostbites tended . Some hot food and warm clothes would restore most of them, he hoped, though the Hornfoot man was like to lose both feet . The corpses he consigned to the ice cells. Clydas had come and gone, Jon noted as he was hanging his cloak on the peg beside the door . A letter had been left on the table in his solar . Eastwatch or the Shadow Tower, he assumed at first glance . But the wax was gold, not black . The seal showed a stag ' s head within a flaming heart . Stannis . Jon cracked the hardened wax, flattened the roll of parchment, read . A maester ' s hand, but the king ' s words. Stannis had taken Deepwood Motte, and the mountain clans had joined him . Flint, Norrey, Wull, Liddle, all. And we had other help, unexpected but most welcome, from a daughter of Bear Island . Alysane Mormont, whose men name her the She-Bear, hid fighters inside a gaggle of fishing sloops and took the ironmen unawares where they lay off the strand . Greyjoy ' s longships are burned or taken, her crews slain or surrendered . The captains, knights, notable warriors, and others of high birth we shall ransom or make other use of, the rest I mean to hang … The Night ' s Watch was sworn to take no side in the quarrels and conflicts of the realm . Nonetheless, Jon Snow could not help but feel a certain satisfaction . He read on. … more northmen coming in as word spreads of our victory . Fisherfolk, freeriders, hillmen, crofters from the deep of the wolfswood and villagers who fled their homes along the stony shore to escape the ironmen, survivors from the battle outside the gates of Winterfell, men once sworn to the Hornwoods, the Cerwyns, and the Tallharts . We are five thousand strong as I write, our numbers swelling every day . And word has come to us that Roose Bolton moves toward Winterfell with all his power, there to wed his bastard to your half sister . He must not be allowed to restore the castle to its former strength . We march against him . Arnolf Karstark and Mors Umber will join us . I will save your sister if I can, and find a better match for her than Ramsay Snow . You and your brothers must hold the Wall until I can return. It was signed, in a different hand, Done in the Light of Lord, under the sign and seal of Stannis of House Baratheon, the First of His Name, King of the Andals, the Rhoynar, and the First Men, Lord of the Seven Kingdoms, and Protector of the Realm. The moment Jon set the letter aside, the parchment curled up again, as if eager to protect its secrets . He was not at all sure how he felt about what he had just read . Battles had been fought at Winterfell before, but never one without a Stark on one side or the other . " The castle is a shell, " he said, " not Winterfell, but the ghost of Winterfell . " It was painful just to think of it, much less say the words aloud . And still … He wondered how many men old Crowfood would bring to the fray, and how many swords Arnolf Karstark would be able to conjure up . Half the Umbers would be across the field with Whoresbane, fighting beneath the flayed man of the Dreadfort, and the greater part of the strength of both houses had gone south with Robb, never to return . Even ruined, Winterfell itself would confer a considerable advantage on whoever held it . Robert Baratheon would have seen that at once and moved swiftly to secure the castle, with the forced marches and midnight rides for which he had been famous . Would his brother be as bold? Not likely . Stannis was a deliberate commander, and his host was a half-digested stew of clansmen, southron knights, king ' s men and queen ' s men, salted with a few northern lords . He should move on Winterfell swiftly, or not at all, Jon thought . It was not his place to advise the king, but … He glanced at the letter again . I will save your sister if I can . A surprisingly tender sentiment from Stannis, though undercut by that final, brutal if I can and the addendum and find a better match for her than Ramsay Snow . But what if Arya was not there to be saved? What if Lady Melisandre ' s flames had told it true? Could his sister truly have escaped such captors? How would she do that? Arya was always quick and clever, but in the end she ' s just a little girl, and Roose Bolton is not the sort who would be careless with a prize of such great worth. What if Bolton never had his sister? This wedding could well be just some ruse to lure Stannis into a trap . Eddard Stark had never had any reason to complain of the Lord of the Dreadfort, so far as Jon knew, but even so he had never trusted him, with his whispery voice and his pale, pale eyes. A grey girl on a dying horse, fleeing from her marriage . On the strength of those words he had loosed Mance Rayder and six spearwives on the north . " Young ones, and pretty, " Mance had said . The unburnt king supplied some names, and Dolorous Edd had done the rest, smuggling them from Mole ' s Town . It seemed like madness now . He might have done better to strike down Mance the moment he revealed himself . Jon had a certain grudging admiration for the late King-Beyond-the-Wall, but the man was an oathbreaker and a turncloak . He had even less trust in Melisandre . Yet somehow here he was, pinning his hopes on them . All to save my sister . But the men of the Night ' s Watch have no sisters. When Jon had been a boy at Winterfell, his hero had been the Young Dragon, the boy king who had conquered Dorne at the age of fourteen . Despite his bastard birth, or perhaps because of it, Jon Snow had dreamed of leading men to glory just as King Daeron had, of growing up to be a conqueror . Now he was a man grown and the Wall was his, yet all he had were doubts . He could not even seem to conquer those. Val waited by the gate in the predawn cold, wrapped up in a bearskin cloak so large it might well have fit Sam . Beside her was a garron, saddled and bridled, a shaggy grey with one white eye . Mully and Dolorous Edd stood with her, a pair of unlikely guards . Their breath frosted in the cold black air. Jon said, incredulous [BOS] You gave her a blind horse? [EOS]  " He ' s only half-blind, m ' lord, " offered Mully . " Elsewise he ' s sound enough . " He patted the garron on the neck. " The horse may be half-blind, but I am not, " said Val . " I know where I must go . " " My lady, you do not have to do this . The risk— " " —is mine, Lord Snow . And I am no southron lady but a woman of the free folk . I know the forest better than all your black-cloaked rangers . It holds no ghosts for me . " I hope not . Jon was counting on that, trusting that Val could succeed where Black Jack Bulwer and his companions had failed . She need fear no harm from the free folk, he hoped … but both of them knew too well that wildlings were not the only ones waiting in the woods . " You have sufficient food? " " Hard bread, hard cheese, oat cakes, salt cod, salt beef, salt mutton, and a skin of sweet wine to rinse all that salt out of my mouth . I will not die of hunger . " " Then it ' s time you were away . " " You have my word, Lord Snow . I will return, with Tormund or without him . " Val glanced at the sky . The moon was but half-full . " Look for me on the first day of the full moon . " " I will . " Do not fail me, he thought, or Stannis will have my head . " Do I have your word that you will keep our princess closely? " the king had said, and Jon had promised that he would . Val is no princess, though . I told him that half a hundred times . It was a feeble sort of evasion, a sad rag wrapped around his wounded word . His father would never have approved . I am the sword that guards the realm of men, Jon reminded himself, and in the end, that must be worth more than one man ' s honor. The road beneath the Wall was as dark and cold as the belly of an ice dragon and as twisty as a serpent . Dolorous Edd led them through with a torch in hand . Mully had the keys for the three gates, where bars of black iron as thick as a man ' s arm closed off the passage . Spearmen at each gate knuckled their foreheads at Jon Snow but stared openly at Val and her garron. When they emerged north of the Wall, through a thick door made of freshly hewn green wood, the wildling princess paused for a moment to gaze out across the snow-covered field where King Stannis had won his battle . Beyond, the haunted forest waited, dark and silent . The light of the half-moon turned Val ' s honey-blond hair a pale silver and left her cheeks as white as snow . She took a deep breath . " The air tastes sweet . " " My tongue is too numb to tell . All I can taste is cold . " " Cold? " Val laughed lightly . " No . When it is cold it will hurt to breathe . When the Others come … " The thought was a disquieting one . Six of the rangers Jon had sent out were still missing . It is too soon . They may yet be back . But another part of him insisted, They are dead, every man of them . You sent them out to die, and you are doing the same to Val . " Tell Tormund what I ' ve said . " " He may not heed your words, but he will hear them . " Val kissed him lightly on the cheek . " You have my thanks, Lord Snow . For the half-blind horse, the salt cod, the free air . For hope . " Their breath mingled, a white mist in the air . Jon Snow drew back and said, " The only thanks I want is— " " —Tormund Giantsbane . Aye . " Val pulled up the hood of her bearskin . The brown pelt was well salted with grey . " Before I go, one question . Did you kill Jarl, my lord? " " The Wall killed Jarl . " " So I ' d heard . But I had to be sure . " " You have my word . I did not kill him . " Though I might have if things had gone otherwise. " This is farewell, then, " she said, almost playfully. Jon Snow was in no mood for it . It is too cold and dark to play, and the hour is too late [BOS] Only for a time . You will return . For the boy, if for no other reason . [EOS]  " Craster ' s son? " Val shrugged . " He is no kin to me . " " I have heard you singing to him . " " I was singing to myself . Am I to blame if he listens? " A faint smile brushed her lips . " It makes him laugh . Oh, very well . He is a sweet little monster . " " His milk name . I had to call him something . See that he stays safe and warm . For his mother ' s sake, and mine . And keep him away from the red woman . She knows who he is . She sees things in her fires . " Arya, he thought, hoping it was so . " Ashes and cinders . " " Kings and dragons . " Dragons again . For a moment Jon could almost see them too, coiling in the night, their dark wings outlined against a sea of flame . " If she knew, she would have taken the boy away from us . Dalla ' s boy, not your monster . A word in the king ' s ear would have been the end of it . " And of me . Stannis would have taken it for treason . " Why let it happen if she knew? " " Because it suited her . Fire is a fickle thing . No one knows which way a flame will go . " Val put a foot into a stirrup, swung her leg over her horse ' s back, and looked down from the saddle . " Do you remember what my sister told you? " " Yes . " A sword without a hilt, with no safe way to hold it . But Melisandre had the right of it . Even a sword without a hilt is better than an empty hand when foes are all around you. " Good . " Val wheeled the garron toward the north . " The first night of the full moon, then . " Jon watched her ride away wondering if he would ever see her face again . I am no southron lady, he could hear her say, but a woman of the free folk. I don ' t care what she says, muttered Dolorous Edd, as Val vanished behind a stand of soldier pines . The air is so cold it hurts to breathe . I would stop, but that would hurt worse . He rubbed his hands together . This is going to end badly. " You say that of everything . " " Aye, m ' lord . Usually I ' m right . " Mully cleared his throat . " M ' lord? The wildling princess, letting her go, the men may say— " " —that I am half a wildling myself, a turncloak who means to sell the realm to our raiders, cannibals, and giants . " Jon did not need to stare into a fire to know what was being said of him . The worst part was, they were not wrong, not wholly . " Words are wind, and the wind is always blowing at the Wall . Come . " It was still dark when Jon returned to his chambers behind the armory . Ghost was not yet back, he saw . Still hunting . The big white direwolf was gone more oft than not of late, ranging farther and farther in search of prey . Between the men of the Watch and the wildlings down in Mole ' s Town, the hills and fields near Castle Black had been hunted clean, and there had been little enough game to begin with . Winter is coming, Jon reflected . And soon, too soon . He wondered if they would ever see a spring. Dolorous Edd made the trek to the kitchens and soon was back with a tankard of brown ale and a covered platter . Under the lid Jon discovered three duck ' s eggs fried in drippings, a strip of bacon, two sausages, a blood pudding, and half a loaf of bread still warm from the oven . He ate the bread and half an egg . He would have eaten the bacon too, but the raven made off with it before he had the chance . Jon said, as the bird flapped up to the lintel above the door to devour its prize [BOS] Thief, [EOS]  " Thief, " the raven agreed. Jon tried a bite of sausage . He was washing the taste from his mouth with a sip of ale when Edd returned to tell him Bowen Marsh was without [BOS] Othell ' s with him, and Septon Cellador . [EOS]  That was quick . He wondered who was telling tales and if there was more than one . " Send them in . " " Aye, m ' lord . You ' ll want to watch your sausages with this lot, though . They have a hungry look about them . " Hungry was not the word Jon would have used . Septon Cellador appeared confused and groggy and in dire need of some scales from the dragon that had flamed him, whilst First Builder Othell Yarwyck looked as if he had swallowed something he could not quite digest . Bowen Marsh was angry . Jon could see it in his eyes, the tightness around his mouth, the flush to those round cheeks . That red is not from cold . " Please sit, " he said . " May I offer you food or drink? " " We broke our fast in the commons, " said Marsh. " I could do with more . " Yarwyck eased himself down onto a chair . " Good of you to offer . " " Perhaps some wine? " said Septon Cellador. " Corn, " screamed the raven from the lintel . " Corn, corn . " Wine for the septon and a plate for our First Builder, Jon told Dolorous Edd . Nothing for the bird . He turned back to his visitors . You ' re here about Val. " And other matters, " said Bowen Marsh . " The men have concerns, my lord . " And who is it who appointed you to speak for them? " As do I. Othell, how goes the work at the Nightfort? I have had a letter from Ser Axell Florent, who styles himself the Queen ' s Hand . He tells me that Queen Selyse is not pleased with her quarters at Eastwatch-by-the-Sea and wishes to move into her husband ' s new seat at once . Will that be possible? " Yarwyck shrugged . " We ' ve got most of the keep restored and put a roof back on the kitchens . She ' d need food and furnishings and firewood, mind you, but it might serve . Not so many comforts as Eastwatch, to be sure . And a long way from the ships, should Her Grace wish to leave us, but … aye, she could live there, though it will be years before the place looks a proper castle . Sooner if I had more builders . " " I could offer you a giant . " That gave Othell a start . " The monster in the yard? " " His name is Wun Weg Wun Dar Wun, Leathers tells me . A lot to wrap a tongue around, I know . Leathers calls him Wun Wun, and that seems to serve . " Wun Wun was very little like the giants in Old Nan ' s tales, those huge savage creatures who mixed blood into their morning porridge and devoured whole bulls, hair and hide and horns . This giant ate no meat at all, though he was a holy terror when served a basket of roots, crunching onions and turnips and even raw hard neeps between his big square teeth . " He ' s a willing worker, though getting him to understand what you want is not always easy . He speaks the Old Tongue after a fashion, but nothing of the Common . Tireless, though, and his strength is prodigious . He could do the work of a dozen men . " " I … my lord, the men would never … giants eat human flesh, I think … no, my lord, I thank you, but I do not have the men to watch over such a creature, he … " Jon Snow was unsurprised [BOS] As you wish . We will keep the giant here . [EOS] Truth be told, he would have been loath to part with Wun Wun . You know nothing, Jon Snow, Ygritte might say, but Jon spoke with the giant whenever he could, through Leathers or one of the free folk they had brought back from the grove, and was learning much and more about his people and their history . He only wished that Sam were here to write the stories down. That was not to say that he was blind to the danger Wun Wun represented . The giant would lash out violently when threatened, and those huge hands were strong enough to rip a man apart . He reminded Jon of Hodor . Hodor twice as big, twice as strong, and half as clever . There ' s a thought to sober even Septon Cellador . But if Tormund has giants with him, Wun Weg Wun Dar Wun may help us treat with them. Mormont ' s raven muttered his annoyance as the door opened beneath him, heralding the return of Dolorous Edd with a flagon of wine and a plate of eggs and sausages . Bowen Marsh waited with obvious impatience as Edd poured, resuming only when he left again . " Tollett is a good man, and well liked, and Iron Emmett has been a fine master-at-arms, " he said then . " Yet the talk is that you mean to send them away . " " We need good men at Long Barrow . " " Whore ' s Hole, the men have started calling it, " said Marsh, " but be that as it may . Is it true that you mean to replace Emmett with this savage Leathers as our master-at-arms? That is an office most oft reserved for knights, or rangers at the least . " Jon agreed mildly [BOS] Leathers is savage, I can attest to that . I ' ve tried him in the practice yard . He ' s as dangerous with a stone axe as most knights are with castle-forged steel . I grant you, he is not as patient as I ' d like, and some of the boys are terrified of him … but that ' s not all for the bad . One day they ' ll find themselves in a real fight, and a certain familiarity with terror will serve them well . [EOS]  " He ' s a wildling . " " He was, until he said the words . Now he is our brother . One who can teach the boys more than swordcraft . It would not hurt them to learn a few words of the Old Tongue and something of the ways of the free folk . " " Free, " the raven muttered . " Corn . King . " " The men do not trust him . " Which men? Jon might have asked . How many? But that would lead him down a road he did not mean to ride . " I am sorry to hear that . Is there more? " Septon Cellador spoke up . " This boy Satin . It ' s said you mean to make him your steward and squire, in Tollett ' s place . My lord, the boy ' s a whore … a … dare I say … a painted catamite from the brothels of Oldtown . " And you are a drunk . " What he was in Oldtown is none of our concern . He ' s quick to learn and very clever . The other recruits started out despising him, but he won them over and made friends of them all . He ' s fearless in a fight and can even read and write after a fashion . He should be capable of fetching me my meals and saddling my horse, don ' t you think? " " Most like, " said Bowen Marsh, stony-faced, " but the men do not like it . Traditionally the lord commander ' s squires are lads of good birth being groomed for command . Does my lord believe the men of the Night ' s Watch would ever follow a whore into battle? " Jon ' s temper flashed [BOS] They have followed worse . The Old Bear left a few cautionary notes about certain of the men, for his successor . We have a cook at the Shadow Tower who was fond of raping septas . He burned a seven-pointed star into his flesh for every one he claimed . His left arm is stars from wrist to elbow, and stars mark his calves as well . At Eastwatch we have a man who set his father ' s house afire and barred the door . His entire family burned to death, all nine . Whatever Satin may have done in Oldtown, he is our brother now, and he will be my squire . [EOS]  Septon Cellador drank some wine . Othell Yarwyck stabbed a sausage with his dagger . Bower Marsh sat red-faced . The raven flapped its wings and said, " Corn, corn, kill . " Finally the Lord Steward cleared his throat . " Your lordship knows best, I am sure . Might I ask about these corpses in the ice cells? They make the men uneasy . And to keep them under guard? Surely that is a waste of two good men, unless you fear that they … " " … will rise? I pray they do . " Septon Cellador paled . " Seven save us . " Wine dribbled down his chin in a red line . " Lord Commander, wights are monstrous, unnatural creatures . Abominations before the eyes of the gods . You … you cannot mean to try to talk with them? " Can they talk? asked Jon Snow . I think not, but I cannot claim to know . Monsters they may be, but they were men before they died . How much remains? The one I slew was intent on killing Lord Commander Mormont . Plainly it remembered who he was and where to find him . Maester Aemon would have grasped his purpose, Jon did not doubt; Sam Tarly would have been terrified, but he would have understood as well . My lord father used to tell me that a man must know his enemies . We understand little of the wights and less about the Others . We need to learn. That answer did not please them . Septon Cellador fingered the crystal that hung about his neck and said, " I think this most unwise, Lord Snow . I shall pray to the Crone to lift her shining lamp and lead you down the path of wisdom . " Jon Snow ' s patience was exhausted . " We could all do with a bit more wisdom, I am sure . " You know nothing, Jon Snow . " Now, shall we speak of Val? " " It is true, then? " said Marsh . " You have released her . " " Beyond the Wall . " Septon Cellador sucked in his breath . " The king ' s prize . His Grace will be most wroth to find her gone . " " Val will return . " Before Stannis, if the gods are good. " How can you know that? " demanded Bowen Marsh. " She said she would . " " And if she lied? If she meets with misadventure? " " Why, then, you may have a chance to choose a lord commander more to your liking . Until such time, I fear you ' ll still need to suffer me . " Jon took a swallow of ale . " I sent her to find Tormund Giantsbane and bring him my offer . " " If we may know, what offer is this? " " The same offer I made at Mole ' s Town . Food and shelter and peace, if he will join his strength to ours, fight our common enemy, help us hold the Wall . " Bowen Marsh did not appear surprised . " You mean to let him pass . " His voice suggested he had known all along . " To open the gates for him and his followers . Hundreds, thousands . " " If he has that many left . " Septon Cellador made the sign of the star . Othell Yarwyck grunted . Bowen Marsh said, " Some might call this treason . These are wildlings . Savages, raiders, rapers, more beast than man . " " Tormund is none of those things, " said Jon, " no more than Mance Rayder . But even if every word you said was true, they are still men, Bowen . Living men, human as you and me . Winter is coming, my lords, and when it does, we living men will need to stand together against the dead . " " Snow, " screamed Lord Mormont ' s raven . " Snow, Snow . " Jon ignored him [BOS] We have been questioning the wildlings we brought back from the grove . Several of them told an interesting tale, of a woods witch called Mother Mole . [EOS]  " Mother Mole? " said Bowen Marsh . " An unlikely name . " " Supposedly she made her home in a burrow beneath a hollow tree . Whatever the truth of that, she had a vision of a fleet of ships arriving to carry the free folk to safety across the narrow sea . Thousands of those who fled the battle were desperate enough to believe her . Mother Mole has led them all to Hardhome, there to pray and await salvation from across the sea . " Othell Yarwyck scowled . " I ' m no ranger, but … Hardhome is an unholy place, it ' s said . Cursed . Even your uncle used to say as much, Lord Snow . Why would they go there? " Jon had a map before him on the table . He turned it so they could see [BOS] Hardhome sits on a sheltered bay and has a natural harbor deep enough for the biggest ships afloat . Wood and stone are plentiful near there . The waters teem with fish, and there are colonies of seals and sea cows close at hand . [EOS]  " All that ' s true, I don ' t doubt, " said Yarwyck, " but it ' s not a place I ' d want to spend a night . You know the tale . " He did . Hardhome had been halfway toward becoming a town, the only true town north of the Wall, until the night six hundred years ago when hell had swallowed it . Its people had been carried off into slavery or slaughtered for meat, depending on which version of the tale you believed, their homes and halls consumed in a conflagration that burned so hot that watchers on the Wall far to the south had thought the sun was rising in the north . Afterward ashes rained down on haunted forest and Shivering Sea alike for almost half a year . Traders reported finding only nightmarish devastation where Hardhome had stood, a landscape of charred trees and burned bones, waters choked with swollen corpses, blood-chilling shrieks echoing from the cave mouths that pocked the great cliff that loomed above the settlement. Six centuries had come and gone since that night, but Hardhome was still shunned . The wild had reclaimed the site, Jon had been told, but rangers claimed that the overgrown ruins were haunted by ghouls and demons and burning ghosts with an unhealthy taste for blood . Jon said, [BOS] It is not the sort of refuge I ' d chose either, but Mother Mole was heard to preach that the free folk would find salvation where once they found damnation . [EOS]  Septon Cellador pursed his lips . " Salvation can be found only through the Seven . This witch has doomed them all . " " And saved the Wall, mayhaps, " said Bowen Marsh . " These are enemies we speak of . Let them pray amongst the ruins, and if their gods send ships to carry them off to a better world, well and good . In this world I have no food to feed them . " Jon flexed the fingers of his sword hand [BOS] Cotter Pyke ' s galleys sail past Hardhome from time to time . He tells me there is no shelter there but the caves . The screaming caves, his men call them . Mother Mole and those who followed her will perish there, of cold and starvation . Hundreds of them . Thousands . [EOS]  " Thousands of enemies . Thousands of wildlings . " Thousands of people, Jon thought . Men, women, children . Anger rose inside him, but when he spoke his voice was quiet and cold . " Are you so blind, or is it that you do not wish to see? What do you think will happen when all these enemies are dead? " Above the door the raven muttered, " Dead, dead, dead . " Let me tell you what will happen, Jon said . The dead will rise again, in their hundreds and their thousands . They will rise as wights, with black hands and pale blue eyes, and they will come for us . He pushed himself to his feet, the fingers of his sword hand opening and closing . You have my leave to go. Septon Cellador rose grey-faced and sweating, Othell Yarwyck stiffly, Bowen Marsh tight-lipped and pale . " Thank you for your time, Lord Snow . " They left without another word. Queen Selyse descended upon Castle Black with her daughter and her daughter ' s fool, her serving girls and lady companions, and a retinue of knights, sworn swords, and men-at-arms fifty strong . Queen ' s men all, Jon Snow knew . They may attend Selyse, but it is Melisandre they serve . The red priestess had warned him of their coming almost a day before the raven arrived from Eastwatch with the same message. He met the queen ' s party by the stables, accompanied by Satin, Bowen Marsh, and half a dozen guards in long black cloaks . It would never do to come before this queen without a retinue of his own, if half of what they said of her was true . She might mistake him for a stableboy and hand him the reins of her horse. The snows had finally moved off to the south and given them a respite . There was even a hint of warmth in the air as Jon Snow took a knee before this southron queen . " Your Grace . Castle Black welcomes you and yours . " Queen Selyse looked down at him . " My thanks . Please escort me to your lord commander . " " My brothers chose me for that honor . I am Jon Snow . " " You? They said you were young, but … " Queen Selyse ' s face was pinched and pale . She wore a crown of red gold with points in the shape of flames, a twin to that worn by Stannis . " … you may rise, Lord Snow . This is my daughter, Shireen . " Jon inclined his head . Shireen was a homely child, made even uglier by the greyscale that had left her neck and part of her cheek stiff and grey and cracked [BOS] Princess . My brothers and I are at your service, [EOS] he told the girl. Shireen reddened . " Thank you, my lord . " " I believe you are acquainted with my kinsman, Ser Axell Florent? " the queen went on. " Only by raven . " And report . The letters he ' d received from Eastwatch-by-the-Sea had a deal to say of Axell Florent, very little of it good . " Ser Axell . " " Lord Snow . " A stout man, Florent had short legs and a thick chest . Coarse hair covered his cheeks and jowls and poked from his ears and nostrils. " My loyal knights, " Queen Selyse went on . " Ser Narbert, Ser Benethon, Ser Brus, Ser Patrek, Ser Dorden, Ser Malegorn, Ser Lambert, Ser Perkin . " Each worthy bowed in turn . She did not trouble to name her fool, but the cowbells on his antlered hat and the motley tattooed across his puffy cheeks made him hard to overlook . Patchface . Cotter Pyke ' s letters had made mention of him as well . Pyke claimed he was a simpleton. Then the queen beckoned to another curious member of her entourage: a tall gaunt stick of a man, his height accentuated by an outlandish three-tiered hat of purple felt . " And here we have the honorable Tycho Nestoris, an emissary of the Iron Bank of Braavos, come to treat with His Grace King Stannis . " The banker doffed his hat and made a sweeping bow . " Lord Commander . I thank you and your brothers for your hospitality . " He spoke the Common Tongue flawlessly, with only the slightest hint of accent . Half a foot taller than Jon, the Braavosi sported a beard as thin as a rope sprouting from his chin and reaching almost to his waist . His robes were a somber purple, trimmed with ermine . A high stiff collar framed his narrow face . " I hope we shall not inconvenience you too greatly . " " Not at all, my lord . You are most welcome . " More welcome than this queen, if truth be told . Cotter Pyke had sent a raven ahead to advise them of the banker ' s coming . Jon Snow had thought of little since. Jon turned back to the queen [BOS] The royal chambers in the King ' s Tower have been prepared for Your Grace for so long as you wish to remain with us . This is our Lord Steward, Bowen Marsh . He will find quarters for your men . [EOS]  " How kind of you to make room for us . " The queen ' s words were courteous enough, though her tone said, It is no more than your duty, and you had best hope these quarters please me . " We will not be with you long . A few days at the most . It is our intent to press on to our new seat at the Nightfort as soon as we are rested . The journey from Eastwatch was wearisome . " " As you say, Your Grace, " said Jon . " You will be cold and hungry, I am sure . A hot meal awaits you in our common room . " " Very good . " The queen glanced about the yard . " First, though, we wish to consult with the Lady Melisandre . " " Of course, Your Grace . Her apartments are in the King ' s Tower as well . This way, if you will? " Queen Selyse nodded, took her daughter by the hand, and permitted him to lead them from the stables . Ser Axell, the Braavosi banker, and the rest of her party followed, like so many ducklings done up in wool and fur. " Your Grace, " said Jon Snow, " my builders have done all they can to make the Nightfort ready to receive you … yet much of it remains in ruins . It is a large castle, the largest on the Wall, and we have only been able to restore a part of it . You might be more comfortable back at Eastwatch-by-the-Sea . " Queen Selyse sniffed . " We are done with Eastwatch . We did not like it there . A queen should be mistress beneath her own roof . We found your Cotter Pyke to be an uncouth and unpleasant man, quarrelsome and niggardly . " You should hear what Cotter says of you . " I am sorry for that, but I fear Your Grace will find conditions at the Nightfort even less to your liking . We speak of a fortress, not a palace . A grim place, and cold . Whereas Eastwatch— " " Eastwatch is not safe . " The queen put a hand on her daughter ' s shoulder . " This is the king ' s true heir . Shireen will one day sit the Iron Throne and rule the Seven Kingdoms . She must be kept from harm, and Eastwatch is where the attack will come . This Nightfort is the place my husband has chosen for our seat, and there we shall abide . We—oh! " An enormous shadow emerged from behind the shell of the Lord Commander ' s Tower . Princess Shireen gave a shriek, and three of the queen ' s knights gasped in harmony . Another swore . " Seven save us, " he said, quite forgetting his new red god in his shock. Jon told them [BOS] Don ' t be afraid, There ' s no harm in him, Your Grace . This is Wun Wun . [EOS]  " Wun Weg Wun Dar Wun . " The giant ' s voice rumbled like a boulder crashing down a mountainside . He sank to his knees before them . Even kneeling, he loomed over them . " Kneel queen . Little queen . " Words that Leathers had taught him, no doubt. Princess Shireen ' s eyes went wide as dinner plates . " He ' s a giant! A real true giant, like from the stories . But why does he talk so funny? " " He only knows a few words of the Common Tongue as yet, " said Jon . " In their own land, giants speak the Old Tongue . " " Can I touch him? " Best not, her mother warned . Look at him . A filthy creature . The queen turned her frown on Jon . Lord Snow, what is this bestial creature doing on our side of the Wall? " Wun Wun is a guest of the Night ' s Watch, as you are . " The queen did not like that answer . Nor did her knights . Ser Axell grimaced in disgust, Ser Brus gave a nervous titter, Ser Narbert said, " I had been told all the giants were dead . " " Almost all . " Ygritte wept for them. " In the dark the dead are dancing . " Patchface shuffled his feet in a grotesque dance step . " I know, I know, oh oh oh . " At Eastwatch someone had sewn him a motley cloak of beaver pelts, sheepskins, and rabbit fur . His hat sported antlers hung with bells and long brown flaps of squirrel fur that hung down over his ears . Every step he took set him to ringing. Wun Wun gaped at him with fascination, but when the giant reached for him the fool hopped back away, jingling . " Oh no, oh no, oh no . " That brought Wun Wun lurching to his feet . The queen grabbed hold of Princess Shireen and pulled her back, her knights reached for their swords, and Patchface reeled away in alarm, lost his footing, and plopped down on his arse in a snowdrift. Wun Wun began to laugh . A giant ' s laughter could put to shame a dragon ' s roar . Patchface covered his ears, Princess Shireen pressed her face into her mother ' s furs, and the boldest of the queen ' s knights moved forward, steel in hand . Jon raised an arm to block his path . " You do not want to anger him . Sheathe your steel, ser . Leathers, take Wun Wun back to Hardin ' s . " " Eat now, Wun Wun? " asked the giant. Jon agreed . To Leathers he said, [BOS] Eat now, I ' ll send out a bushel of vegetables for him and meat for you . Start a fire . [EOS]  Leathers grinned . " I will, m ' lord, but Hardin ' s is bone cold . Perhaps m ' lord could send out some wine to warm us? " " For you . Not him . " Wun Wun had never tasted wine until he came to Castle Black, but once he had, he had taken a gigantic liking to it . Too much a liking . Jon had enough to contend with just now without adding a drunken giant to the mix . He turned back to the queen ' s knights . " My lord father used to say a man should never draw his sword unless he means to use it . " " Using it was my intent . " The knight was clean-shaved and windburnt; beneath a cloak of white fur he wore a cloth-of-silver surcoat emblazoned with a blue five-pointed star . " I had been given to understand that the Night ' s Watch defended the realm against such monsters . No one mentioned keeping them as pets . " Another bloody southron fool . " You are …? " " Ser Patrek of King ' s Mountain, if it please my lord . " " I do not know how you observe guest right on your mountain, ser . In the north we hold it sacred . Wun Wun is a guest here . " Ser Patrek smiled . " Tell me, Lord Commander, should the Others turn up, do you plan to offer hospitality to them as well? " The knight turned to his queen . " Your Grace, that is the King ' s Tower there, if I am not mistaken . If I may have the honor? " " As you wish . " The queen took his arm and swept past the men of the Night ' s Watch with never a second glance. Those flames on her crown are the warmest thing about her . Jon called [BOS] Lord Tycho, A moment, please . [EOS]  The Braavosi halted . " No lord I . Only a simple servant of the Iron Bank of Braavos . " " Cotter Pyke informs me that you came to Eastwatch with three ships . A galleas, a galley, and a cog . " " Just so, my lord . The crossing can be perilous in this season . One ship alone may founder, where three together may aid one another . The Iron Bank is always prudent in such matters . " " Perhaps before you leave we might have a quiet word? " " I am at your service, Lord Commander . And in Braavos we say there is no time like the present . Will that suit? " " As good as any . Shall we repair to my solar, or would you like to see the top of the Wall? " The banker glanced up, to where the ice loomed vast and pale against the sky . " I fear it will be bitter cold up top . " " That, and windy . You learn to walk well away from the edge . Men have been blown off . Still . The Wall is like nothing else on earth . You may never have another chance to see it . " " No doubt I shall rue my caution upon my deathbed, but after a long day in the saddle, a warm room sounds preferable to me . " " My solar, then . Satin, some mulled wine, if you would . " Jon ' s rooms behind the armory were quiet enough, if not especially warm . His fire had gone out some time ago; Satin was not as diligent in feeding it as Dolorous Edd had been . Mormont ' s raven greeted them with a shriek of " Corn! " Jon hung up his cloak . " You come seeking Stannis, is that correct? " " It is, my lord . Queen Selyse has suggested that we might send word to Deepwood Motte by raven, to inform His Grace that I await his pleasure at the Nightfort . The matter that I mean to put to him is too delicate to entrust to letters . " " A debt . " What else could it be? " His own debt? Or his brother ' s? " The banker pressed his fingers together . " It would not be proper for me to discuss Lord Stannis ' s indebtedness or lack of same . As to King Robert … it was indeed our pleasure to assist His Grace in his need . For so long as Robert lived, all was well . Now, however, the Iron Throne has ceased all repayment . " Could the Lannisters truly be so foolish? " You cannot mean to hold Stannis responsible for his brother ' s debts . " " The debts belong to the Iron Throne, " Tycho declared, " and whosoever sits on that chair must pay them . Since young King Tommen and his counsellors have become so obdurate, we mean to broach the subject with King Stannis . Should he prove himself more worthy of our trust, it would of course be our great pleasure to lend him whatever help he needs . " " Help, " the raven screamed . " Help, help, help . " Much of this Jon had surmised the moment he learned that the Iron Bank had sent an envoy to the Wall . " When last we heard, His Grace was marching on Winterfell to confront Lord Bolton and his allies . You may seek him there if you wish, though that carries a risk . You could find yourself caught up in his war . " Tycho bowed his head . " We who serve the Iron Bank face death full as often as you who serve the Iron Throne . " Is that whom I serve? Jon Snow was no longer certain . " I can provide you with horses, provisions, guides, whatever is required to get you as far as Deepwood Motte . From there you will need to make your own way to Stannis . " And you may well find his head upon a spike . " There will be a price . " " Price, " screamed Mormont ' s raven . " Price, price . " " There is always a price, is there not? " The Braavosi smiled . " What does the Watch require? " " Your ships, for a start . With their crews . " " All three? How will I return to Braavos? " " I only need them for a single voyage . " " A hazardous voyage, I assume . For a start, you said? " " We need a loan as well . Gold enough to keep us fed till spring . To buy food and hire ships to bring it to us . " " Spring? " Tycho sighed . " It is not possible, my lord . " What was it Stannis had said to him? You haggle like a crone with a codfish, Lord Snow . Did Lord Eddard father you on a fishwife? Perhaps he had at that. It took the better part of an hour before the impossible became possible, and another hour before they could agree on terms . The flagon of mulled wine that Satin delivered helped them settle the more nettlesome points . By the time Jon Snow signed the parchment the Braavosi drew up, both of them were half-drunk and quite unhappy . Jon thought that a good sign. The three Braavosi ships would bring the fleet at Eastwatch up to eleven, including the Ibbenese whaler that Cotter Pyke had commandeered on Jon ' s order, a trading galley out of Pentos similarly impressed, and three battered Lysene warships, remnants of Salladhor Saan ' s former fleet driven back north by the autumn storms . All three of Saan ' s ships had been in dire need of refitting, but by now the work should be complete. Eleven ships was no wise enough, but if he waited any longer, the free folk at Hardhome would be dead by the time the rescue fleet arrived . Sail now or not at all . Whether Mother Mole and her people would be desperate enough to entrust their lives to the Night ' s Watch, though … The day had darkened by the time he and Tycho Nestoris left the solar . Snow had begun to fall . " Our respite was a brief one, it would seem . " Jon drew his cloak about himself more tightly. " Winter is nigh upon us . The day I left Braavos, there was ice on the canals . " Jon told him [BOS] Three of my men passed through Braavos not long ago, An old maester, a singer, and a young steward . They were escorting a wildling girl and her child to Oldtown . I do not suppose you chanced to encounter them? [EOS]  " I fear not, my lord . Westerosi pass through Braavos every day, but most come and go from the Ragman ' s Harbor . The ships of the Iron Bank moor at the Purple Harbor . If you wish, I can make inquiries after them when I return home . " " No need . By now they should be safe in Oldtown . " " Let us hope so . The narrow sea is perilous this time of year, and of late there have been troubling reports of strange ships seen amongst the Stepstones . " " Salladhor Saan? " " The Lysene pirate? Some say he has returned to his old haunts, this is so . And Lord Redwyne ' s war fleet creeps through the Broken Arm as well . On its way home, no doubt . But these men and their ships are well-known to us . No, these other sails … from farther east, perhaps … one hears queer talk of dragons . " " Would that we had one here . A dragon might warm things up a bit . " " My lord jests . You will forgive me if I do not laugh . We Braavosi are descended from those who fled Valyria and the wroth of its dragonlords . We do not jape of dragons . " No, I suppose not . " My apologies, Lord Tycho . " " None is required, Lord Commander . Now I find that I am hungry . Lending such large sums of gold will give a man an appetite . Will you be so good as to point me to your feast hall? " Jon gestured [BOS] I will take you there myself . This way . [EOS]  Once there, it would have been discourteous not to break bread with the banker, so Jon sent Satin off to fetch them food . The novelty of newcomers had brought out almost all the men who were not on duty or asleep, so the cellar was crowded and warm. The queen herself was absent, as was her daughter . By now presumably they were settling into the King ' s Tower . But Ser Brus and Ser Malegorn were on hand, entertaining such brothers as had gathered with the latest tidings from Eastwatch and beyond the sea . Three of the queen ' s ladies sat together, attended by their serving maids and a dozen admiring men of the Night ' s Watch. Nearer the door, the Queen ' s Hand was attacking a brace of capons, sucking the meat off the bones and washing down each bite with ale . When he espied Jon Snow, Axell Florent tossed a bone aside, wiped his mouth with the back of his hand, and sauntered over . With his bowed legs, barrel chest, and prominent ears, he presented a comical appearance, but Jon knew better than to laugh at him . He was an uncle to Queen Selyse and had been among the first to follow her in accepting Melisandre ' s red god . If he is not a kinslayer, he is the next best thing . Axell Florent ' s brother had been burned by Melisandre, Maester Aemon had informed him, yet Ser Axell had done little and less to stop it . What sort of man can stand by idly and watch his own brother being burned alive? Nestoris, said Ser Axell, and the lord commander . Might I join you? He lowered himself to the bench before they could reply . Lord Snow, if I may ask … this wildling princess His Grace King Stannis wrote of … where might she be, my lord? Long leagues from here, Jon thought . If the gods are good, by now she has found Tormund Giantsbane . " Val is the younger sister of Dalla, who was Mance Rayder ' s wife and mother to his son . King Stannis took Val and the child captive after Dalla died in childbed, but she is no princess, not as you mean it . " Ser Axell shrugged . " Whatever she may be, at Eastwatch men claimed the wench was fair . I ' d like to see with mine own eyes . Some of these wildling women, well, a man would need to turn them over to do his duty as a husband . If it please the lord commander, bring her out, let us have a look . " " She is not a horse to be paraded for inspection, ser . " " I promise not to count her teeth . " Florent grinned . " Oh, never fear, I ' ll treat her with all the courtesy she is due . " He knows I do not have her . A village has no secrets, and no more did Castle Black . Val ' s absence was not spoken of openly, but some men knew, and in the common hall at night the brothers talked . What has he heard? Jon wondered . How much does he believe? " Forgive me, ser, but Val will not be joining us . " " I ' ll go to her . Where do you keep the wench? " Away from you . " Somewhere safe . Enough, ser . " The knight ' s face grew flushed . " My lord, have you forgotten who I am? " His breath smelled of ale and onions . " Must I speak to the queen? A word from Her Grace and I can have this wildling girl delivered naked to the hall for our inspection . " That would be a pretty trick, even for a queen . Jon said, hoping that was true [BOS] The queen would never presume upon our hospitality, Now I fear I must take my leave, before I forget the duties of a host . Lord Tycho, pray excuse me . [EOS]  " Yes, of course, " the banker said . " A pleasure . " Outside, the snow was coming down more heavily . Across the yard the King ' s Tower had turned into a hulking shadow, the lights in its windows obscured by falling snow. Back in his solar, Jon found the Old Bear ' s raven perched on the back of the oak-and-leather chair behind the trestle table . The bird began to scream for food the moment he entered . Jon took a fistful of dried kernels from the sack by the door and scattered them on the floor, then claimed the chair. Tycho Nestoris had left behind a copy of their agreement . Jon read it over thrice . That was simple, he reflected . Simpler than I dared hope . Simpler than it should have been. It gave him an uneasy feeling . Braavosi coin would allow the Night ' s Watch to buy food from the south when their own stores ran short, food enough to see them through the winter, however long it might prove to be . A long hard winter will leave the Watch so deep in debt that we will never climb out, Jon reminded himself, but when the choice is debt or death, best borrow. He did not have to like it, though . And come spring, when the time came to repay all that gold, he would like it even less . Tycho Nestoris had impressed him as cultured and courteous, but the Iron Bank of Braavos had a fearsome reputation when collecting debts . Each of the Nine Free Cities had its bank, and some had more than one, fighting over every coin like dogs over a bone, but the Iron Bank was richer and more powerful than all the rest combined . When princes defaulted on their debts to lesser banks, ruined bankers sold their wives and children into slavery and opened their own veins . When princes failed to repay the Iron Bank, new princes sprang up from nowhere and took their thrones. As poor plump Tommen may be about to learn . No doubt the Lannisters had good reason for refusing to honor King Robert ' s debts, but it was folly all the same . If Stannis was not too stiff-necked to accept their terms, the Braavosi would give him all the gold and silver he required, coin enough to buy a dozen sellsword companies, to bribe a hundred lords, to keep his men paid, fed, clothed, and armed . Unless Stannis is lying dead beneath the walls of Winterfell, he may just have won the Iron Throne . He wondered if Melisandre had seen that in her fires. Jon sat back, yawned, stretched . On the morrow he would draft orders for Cotter Pyke . Eleven ships to Hardhome . Bring back as many as you can, women and children first . It was time they set sail . Should I go myself, though, or leave it to Cotter? The Old Bear had led a ranging . Aye . And never returned. Jon closed his eyes . Just for a moment … … and woke, stiff as a board, with the Old Bear ' s raven muttering, " Snow, Snow, " and Mully shaking him . " M ' lord, you ' re wanted . Beg pardon, m ' lord . A girl ' s been found . " " A girl? " Jon sat, rubbing the sleep from his eyes with the back of his hands . " Val? Has Val returned? " " Not Val, m ' lord . This side of the Wall, it were . " Arya . Jon straightened . It had to be her. " Girl, " screamed the raven . " Girl, girl . " " Ty and Dannel came on her two leagues south of Mole ' s Town . They were chasing down some wildlings who scampered off down the kingsroad . Brought them back as well, but then they come on the girl . She ' s highborn, m ' lord, and she ' s been asking for you . " " How many with her? " He moved to his basin, splashed water on his face . Gods, but he was tired. " None, m ' lord . She come alone . Her horse was dying under her . All skin and ribs it was, lame and lathered . They cut it loose and took the girl for questioning . " A grey girl on a dying horse . Melisandre ' s fires had not lied, it would seem . But what had become of Mance Rayder and his spearwives? " Where is the girl now? " " Maester Aemon ' s chambers, m ' lord . " The men of Castle Black still called it that, though by now the old maester should be warm and safe in Oldtown . " Girl was blue from the cold, shivering like all get out, so Ty wanted Clydas to have a look at her . " Jon felt fifteen years old again . Little sister . He rose and donned his cloak [BOS] That ' s good . [EOS]  The snow was still falling as he crossed the yard with Mully . A golden dawn was breaking in the east, but behind Lady Melisandre ' s window in the King ' s Tower a reddish light still flickered . Does she never sleep? What game are you playing, priestess? Did you have some other task for Mance? He wanted to believe it would be Arya . He wanted to see her face again, to smile at her and muss her hair, to tell her she was safe . She won ' t be safe, though . Winterfell is burned and broken and there are no more safe places. He could not keep her here with him, no matter how much he might want to . The Wall was no place for a woman, much less a girl of noble birth . Nor was he about to turn her over to Stannis or Melisandre . The king would only want to marry her to one of his own men, Horpe or Massey or Godry Giantslayer, and the gods alone knew what use the red woman might want to make of her. The best solution he could see would mean dispatching her to Eastwatch and asking Cotter Pyke to put her on a ship to someplace across the sea, beyond the reach of all these quarrelsome kings . It would need to wait until the ships returned from Hardhome, to be sure . She could return to Braavos with Tycho Nestoris . Perhaps the Iron Bank could help find some noble family to foster her . Braavos was the nearest of the Free Cities, though … which made it both the best and the worst choice . Lorath or the Port of Ibben might be safer . Wherever he might send her, though, Arya would need silver to support her, a roof above her head, someone to protect her . She was only a child. Maester Aemon ' s old chambers were so warm that the sudden cloud of steam when Mully pulled the door open was enough to blind the both of them . Within, a fresh fire was burning in the hearth, the logs crackling and spitting . Jon stepped over a puddle of damp clothing . " Snow, Snow, Snow, " the ravens called down from above . The girl was curled up near the fire, wrapped in a black woolen cloak three times her size and fast asleep. She looked enough like Arya to give him pause, but only for a moment . A tall, skinny, coltish girl, all legs and elbows, her brown hair was woven in a thick braid and bound about with strips of leather . She had a long face, a pointy chin, small ears. But she was too old, far too old . This girl is almost of an age with me . Jon asked Mully [BOS] Has she eaten? [EOS]  " Only bread and broth, my lord . " Clydas rose from a chair . " It is best to go slow, Maester Aemon always said . Any more and she might not have been able to digest it . " Mully nodded . " Dannel had one o ' Hobb ' s sausages and offered her a bite, but she wouldn ' t touch it . " Jon could not blame her for that . Hobb ' s sausages were made of grease and salt and things that did not bear thinking about [BOS] Perhaps we should just let her rest . [EOS]  That was when the girl sat up, clutching the cloak to her small, pale breasts . She looked confused . " Where …? " " Castle Black, my lady . " " The Wall . " Her eyes filled up with tears . " I ' m here . " Clydas moved closer . " Poor child . How old are you? " " Sixteen on my next nameday . And no child, but a woman grown and flowered . " She yawned, covered her mouth with the cloak . One bare knee peeked through its folds . " You do not wear a chain . Are you a maester? " " No, " said Clydas, " but I have served one . " She does look a bit like Arya, Jon thought . Starved and skinny, but her hair ' s the same color, and her eyes . " I am told you have been asking after me . I am— " " —Jon Snow . " The girl tossed her braid back . " My house and yours are bound in blood and honor . Hear me, kinsman . My uncle Cregan is hard upon my trail . You must not let him take me back to Karhold . " Jon was staring . I know this girl . There was something about her eyes, the way she held herself, the way she talked . For a moment the memory eluded him . Then it came [BOS] Alys Karstark . [EOS]  That brought the ghost of a smile to her lips . " I was not sure you would remember . I was six the last time you saw me . " " You came to Winterfell with your father . " The father Robb beheaded . " I don ' t recall what for . " She blushed . " So I could meet your brother . Oh, there was some other pretext, but that was the real reason . I was almost of an age with Robb, and my father thought we might make a match . There was a feast . I danced with you and your brother both . He was very courteous and said that I danced beautifully . You were sullen . My father said that was to be expected in a bastard . " " I remember . " It was only half a lie. " You ' re still a little sullen, " the girl said, " but I will forgive you that if you will save me from my uncle . " " Your uncle … would that be Lord Arnolf? " He is no lord, Alys said scornfully . My brother Harry is the rightful lord, and by law I am his heir . A daughter comes before an uncle . Uncle Arnolf is only castellan . He ' s my great-uncle, actually, my father ' s uncle . Cregan is his son . I suppose that makes him a cousin, but we always called him uncle . Now they mean to make me call him husband . She made a fist . Before the war I was betrothed to Daryn Hornwood . We were only waiting till I flowered to be wed, but the Kingslayer killed Daryn in the Whispering Wood . My father wrote that he would find some southron lord to wed me, but he never did . Your brother Robb cut off his head for killing Lannisters . Her mouth twisted . I thought the whole reason they marched south was to kill some Lannisters. " It was … not so simple as that . Lord Karstark slew two prisoners, my lady . Unarmed boys, squires in a cell . " The girl did not seem surprised . " My father never bellowed like the Greatjon, but he was no less dangerous in his wroth . He is dead now too, though . So is your brother . But you and I are here, still living . Is there blood feud between us, Lord Snow? " " When a man takes the black he puts his feuds behind him . The Night ' s Watch has no quarrel with Karhold, nor with you . " " Good . I was afraid … I begged my father to leave one of my brothers as castellan, but none of them wished to miss the glory and ransoms to be won in the south . Now Torr and Edd are dead . Harry was a prisoner at Maidenpool when last we heard, but that was almost a year ago . He may be dead as well . I did not know where else to turn but to the last son of Eddard Stark . " " Why not the king? Karhold declared for Stannis . " " My uncle declared for Stannis, in hopes it might provoke the Lannisters to take poor Harry ' s head . Should my brother die, Karhold should pass to me, but my uncles want my birthright for their own . Once Cregan gets a child by me they won ' t need me anymore . He ' s buried two wives already . " She rubbed away a tear angrily, the way Arya might have done it . " Will you help me? " " Marriages and inheritance are matters for the king, my lady . I will write to Stannis on your behalf, but— " Alys Karstark laughed, but it was the laughter of despair . " Write, but do not look for a reply . Stannis will be dead before he gets your message . My uncle will see to that . " " What do you mean? " " Arnolf is rushing to Winterfell, ' tis true, but only so he might put his dagger in your king ' s back . He cast his lot with Roose Bolton long ago … for gold, the promise of a pardon, and poor Harry ' s head . Lord Stannis is marching to a slaughter . So he cannot help me, and would not even if he could . " Alys knelt before him, clutching the black cloak . " You are my only hope, Lord Snow . In your father ' s name, I beg you . Protect me . " R ' hllor, sang Melisandre, her arms upraised against the falling snow, you are the light in our eyes, the fire in our hearts, the heat in our loins . Yours is the sun that warms our days, yours the stars that guard us in the dark of night. " All praise R ' hllor, the Lord of Light, " the wedding guests answered in ragged chorus before a gust of ice-cold wind blew their words away . Jon Snow raised the hood of his cloak. The snowfall was light today, a thin scattering of flakes dancing in the air, but the wind was blowing from the east along the Wall, cold as the breath of the ice dragon in the tales Old Nan used to tell . Even Melisandre ' s fire was shivering; the flames huddled down in the ditch, crackling softly as the red priestess sang . Only Ghost seemed not to feel the chill. Alys Karstark leaned close to Jon . " Snow during a wedding means a cold marriage . My lady mother always said so . " He glanced at Queen Selyse . There must have been a blizzard the day she and Stannis wed. Huddled beneath her ermine mantle and surrounded by her ladies, serving girls, and knights, the southron queen seemed a frail, pale, shrunken thing . A strained smile was frozen into place on her thin lips, but her eyes brimmed with reverence . She hates the cold but loves the flames . He had only to look at her to see that . A word from Melisandre, and she would walk into the fire willingly, embrace it like a lover. Not all her queen ' s men seemed to share her fervor . Ser Brus appeared half-drunk, Ser Malegorn ' s gloved hand was cupped round the arse of the lady beside him, Ser Narbert was yawning, and Ser Patrek of King ' s Mountain looked angry . Jon Snow had begun to understand why Stannis had left them with his queen. The night is dark and filled with terrors, Melisandre sang . Alone we are born and alone we die, but as we walk through this black vale we draw strength from one another, and from you, our lord . Her scarlet silks and satins swirled with every gust of wind . Two come forth today to join their lives, so they may face this world ' s darkness together . Fill their hearts with fire, my lord, so they may walk your shining path hand in hand forever. " Lord of Light, protect us, " cried Queen Selyse . Other voices echoed the response . Melisandre ' s faithful: pallid ladies, shivering serving girls, Ser Axell and Ser Narbert and Ser Lambert, men-at-arms in iron mail and Thenns in bronze, even a few of Jon ' s black brothers . " Lord of Light, bless your children . " Melisandre ' s back was to the Wall, on one side of the deep ditch where her fire burned . The couple to be joined faced her across the ditch . Behind them stood the queen, with her daughter and her tattooed fool . Princess Shireen was wrapped in so many furs that she looked round, breathing in white puffs through the scarf that covered most of her face . Ser Axell Florent and his queen ' s men surrounded the royal party. Though only a few men of the Night ' s Watch had gathered about the ditchfire, more looked down from rooftops and windows and the steps of the great switchback stair . Jon took careful note of who was there and who was not . Some men had the duty; many just off watch were fast asleep . But others had chosen to absent themselves to show their disapproval . Othell Yarwyck and Bowen Marsh were amongst the missing . Septon Chayle had emerged briefly from the sept, fingering the seven-sided crystal on the thong about his neck, only to retreat inside again once the prayers began. Melisandre raised her hands, and the ditchfire leapt upward toward her fingers, like a great red dog springing for a treat . A swirl of sparks rose to meet the snowflakes coming down . " Oh, Lord of Light, we thank you, " she sang to the hungry flames . " We thank you for brave Stannis, by your grace our king . Guide him and defend him, R ' hllor . Protect him from the treacheries of evil men and grant him strength to smite the servants of the dark . " " Grant him strength, " answered Queen Selyse and her knights and ladies . " Grant him courage . Grant him wisdom . " Alys Karstark slipped her arm through Jon ' s . " How much longer, Lord Snow? If I ' m to be buried beneath this snow, I ' d like to die a woman wed . " Jon assured her [BOS] Soon, my lady, Soon . [EOS]  " We thank you for the sun that warms us, " chanted the queen . " We thank you for the stars that watch over us in the black of night . We thank you for our hearths and for our torches that keep the savage dark at bay . We thank you for our bright spirits, the fires in our loins and in our hearts . " And Melisandre said, " Let them come forth, who would be joined . " The flames cast her shadow on the Wall behind her, and her ruby gleamed against the paleness of her throat. Jon turned to Alys Karstark [BOS] My lady . Are you ready? [EOS]  " Yes . Oh, yes . " " You ' re not scared? " The girl smiled in a way that reminded Jon so much of his little sister that it almost broke his heart . " Let him be scared of me . " The snowflakes were melting on her cheeks, but her hair was wrapped in a swirl of lace that Satin had found somewhere, and the snow had begun to collect there, giving her a frosty crown . Her cheeks were flushed and red, and her eyes sparkled. Jon squeezed her hand [BOS] Winter ' s lady . [EOS]  The Magnar of Thenn stood waiting by the fire, clad as if for battle, in fur and leather and bronze scales, a bronze sword at his hip . His receding hair made him look older than his years, but as he turned to watch his bride approach, Jon could see the boy in him . His eyes were big as walnuts, though whether it was the fire, the priestess, or the woman that had put the fear in him Jon could not say . Alys was more right than she knew. " Who brings this woman to be wed? " asked Melisandre. " I do, " said Jon . " Now comes Alys of House Karstark, a woman grown and flowered, of noble blood and birth . " He gave her hand one last squeeze and stepped back to join the others. " Who comes forth to claim this woman? " asked Melisandre. " Me . " Sigorn slapped his chest . " Magnar of Thenn . " " Sigorn, " asked Melisandre, " will you share your fire with Alys, and warm her when the night is dark and full of terrors? " " I swear me . " The Magnar ' s promise was a white cloud in the air . Snow dappled his shoulders . His ears were red . " By the red god ' s flames, I warm her all her days . " " Alys, do you swear to share your fire with Sigorn, and warm him when the night is dark and full of terrors? " " Till his blood is boiling . " Her maiden ' s cloak was the black wool of the Night ' s Watch . The Karstark sunburst sewn on its back was made of the same white fur that lined it. Melisandre ' s eyes shone as bright as the ruby at her throat . " Then come to me and be as one . " As she beckoned, a wall of flames roared upward, licking at the snowflakes with hot orange tongues . Alys Karstark took her Magnar by the hand. Side by side they leapt the ditch. Two went into the flames . A gust of wind lifted the red woman ' s scarlet skirts till she pressed them down again . One emerges . Her coppery hair danced about her head . What fire joins, none may put asunder. " What fire joins, none may put asunder, " came the echo, from queen ' s men and Thenns and even a few of the black brothers. Except for kings and uncles, thought Jon Snow. Cregan Karstark had turned up a day behind his niece . With him came four mounted men-at-arms, a huntsman, and a pack of dogs, sniffing after Lady Alys as if she were a deer . Jon Snow met them on the kingsroad half a league south of Mole ' s Town, before they could turn up at Castle Black, claim guest right, or call for parley . One of Karstark ' s men had loosed a crossbow quarrel at Ty and died for it . That left four, and Cregan himself. Fortunately they had a dozen ice cells . Room for all. Like so much else, heraldry ended at the Wall . The Thenns had no family arms as was customary amongst the nobles of the Seven Kingdoms, so Jon told the stewards to improvise . He thought they had done well . The bride ' s cloak Sigorn fastened about Lady Alys ' s shoulders showed a bronze disk on a field of white wool, surrounded by flames made with wisps of crimson silk . The echo of the Karstark sunburst was there for those who cared to look, but differenced to make the arms appropriate for House Thenn. The Magnar all but ripped the maiden ' s cloak from Alys ' s shoulders, but when he fastened her bride ' s cloak about her he was almost tender . As he leaned down to kiss her cheek, their breath mingled . The flames roared once again . The queen ' s men began to sing a song of praise . " Is it done? " Jon heard Satin whisper. Done and done, muttered Mully, and a good thing . They ' re wed and I ' m half-froze . He was muffled up in his best blacks, woolens so new that they had hardly had a chance to fade yet, but the wind had turned his cheeks as red as his hair . Hobb ' s mulled some wine with cinnamon and cloves . That ' ll warm us some. " What ' s cloves? " asked Owen the Oaf. The snow had started to descend more heavily and the fire in the ditch was guttering out . The crowd began to break apart and stream from the yard, queen ' s men, king ' s men, and free folk alike, all anxious to get out of the wind and the cold . " Will my lord be feasting with us? " Mully asked Jon Snow. " Shortly . " Sigorn might take it as a slight if he did not appear . And this marriage is mine own work, after all . " I have other matters to attend to first, however . " Jon crossed to Queen Selyse, with Ghost beside him . His boots crunched through piles of old snow . It was growing ever more time-consuming to shovel out the paths from one building to another; more and more, the men were resorting to the underground passages they called wormways. " … such a beautiful rite, " the queen was saying . " I could feel our lord ' s fiery gaze upon us . Oh, you cannot know how many times I have begged Stannis to let us be wed again, a true joining of body and spirit blessed by the Lord of Light . I know that I could give His Grace more children if we were bound in fire . " To give him more children you would first need to get him into your bed . Even at the Wall, it was common knowledge that Stannis Baratheon had shunned his wife for years . One could only imagine how His Grace had responded to the notion of a second wedding in the midst of his war. Jon bowed [BOS] If it please Your Grace, the feast awaits . [EOS]  The queen glanced at Ghost suspiciously, then raised her head to Jon . " To be sure . Lady Melisandre knows the way . " The red priestess spoke up . " I must attend my fires, Your Grace . Perhaps R ' hllor will vouchsafe me a glimpse of His Grace . A glimpse of some great victory, mayhaps . " " Oh . " Queen Selyse looked stricken . " To be sure … let us pray for a vision from our lord … " " Satin, show Her Grace to her place, " said Jon. Ser Malegorn stepped forward . " I will escort Her Grace to the feast . We shall not require your … steward . " The way the man drew out the last word told Jon that he had been considering saying something else . Boy? Pet? Whore? Jon bowed again [BOS] As you wish . I shall join you shortly . [EOS]  Ser Malegorn offered his arm, and Queen Selyse took it stiffly . Her other hand settled on her daughter ' s shoulder . The royal ducklings fell in behind them as they made their way across the yard, marching to the music of the bells on the fool ' s hat . " Under the sea the mermen feast on starfish soup, and all the serving men are crabs, " Patchface proclaimed as they went . " I know, I know, oh, oh, oh . " Melisandre ' s face darkened . " That creature is dangerous . Many a time I have glimpsed him in my flames . Sometimes there are skulls about him, and his lips are red with blood . " A wonder you haven ' t had the poor man burned . All it would take was a word in the queen ' s ear, and Patchface would feed her fires . " You see fools in your fire, but no hint of Stannis? " " When I search for him all I see is snow . " The same useless answer . Clydas had dispatched a raven to Deepwood Motte to warn the king of Arnolf Karstark ' s treachery, but whether the bird had reached His Grace in time Jon did not know . The Braavosi banker was off in search of Stannis as well, accompanied by the guides that Jon had given him, but between the war and weather, it would be a wonder if he found him . Jon asked the red priestess [BOS] Would you know if the king was dead? [EOS]  " He is not dead . Stannis is the Lord ' s chosen, destined to lead the fight against the dark . I have seen it in the flames, read of it in ancient prophecy . When the red star bleeds and the darkness gathers, Azor Ahai shall be born again amidst smoke and salt to wake dragons out of stone . Dragonstone is the place of smoke and salt . " Jon had heard all this before . " Stannis Baratheon was the Lord of Dragonstone, but he was not born there . He was born at Storm ' s End, like his brothers . " He frowned . " And what of Mance? Is he lost as well? What do your fires show? " " The same, I fear . Only snow . " Snow . It was snowing heavily to the south, Jon knew . Only two days ' ride from here, the kingsroad was said to be impassable . Melisandre knows that too . And to the east, a savage storm was raging on the Bay of Seals . At last report, the ragtag fleet they had assembled to rescue the free folk from Hardhome still huddled at Eastwatch-by-the-Sea, confined to port by the rough seas . " You are seeing cinders dancing in the updraft . " " I am seeing skulls . And you . I see your face every time I look into the flames . The danger that I warned you of grows very close now . " " Daggers in the dark . I know . You will forgive my doubts, my lady . A grey girl on a dying horse, fleeing from a marriage, that was what you said . " " I was not wrong . " " You were not right . Alys is not Arya . " " The vision was a true one . It was my reading that was false . I am as mortal as you, Jon Snow . All mortals err . " " Even lord commanders . " Mance Rayder and his spearwives had not returned, and Jon could not help but wonder whether the red woman had lied of a purpose . Is she playing her own game? " You would do well to keep your wolf beside you, my lord . " " Ghost is seldom far . " The direwolf raised his head at the sound of his name . Jon scratched him behind the ears . " But now you must excuse me . Ghost, with me . " Carved from the base of the Wall and closed with heavy wooden doors, the ice cells ranged from small to smaller . Some were big enough to allow a man to pace, others so small that prisoners were forced to sit; the smallest were too cramped to allow even that. Jon had given his chief captive the largest cell, a pail to shit in, enough furs to keep him from freezing, and a skin of wine . It took the guards some time to open his cell, as ice had formed inside the lock . Rusted hinges screamed like damned souls when Wick Whittlestick yanked the door wide enough for Jon to slip through . A faint fecal odor greeted him, though less overpowering than he ' d expected . Even shit froze solid in such bitter cold . Jon Snow could see his own reflection dimly inside the icy walls. In one corner of the cell a heap of furs was piled up almost to the height of a man . " Karstark, " said Jon Snow . " Wake up . " The furs stirred . Some had frozen together, and the frost that covered them glittered when they moved . An arm emerged, then a face—brown hair, tangled and matted and streaked with grey, two fierce eyes, a nose, a mouth, a beard . Ice caked the prisoner ' s mustache, clumps of frozen snot . " Snow . " His breath steamed in the air, fogging the ice behind his head . " You have no right to hold me . The laws of hospitality— " " You are no guest of mine . You came to the Wall without my leave, armed, to carry off your niece against her will . Lady Alys was given bread and salt . She is a guest . You are a prisoner . " Jon let that hang for a moment, then said, " Your niece is wed . " Cregan Karstark ' s lips skinned back from his teeth . " Alys was promised to me . " Though past fifty, he had been a strong man when he went into the cell . The cold had robbed him of that strength and left him stiff and weak . " My lord father— " " Your father is a castellan, not a lord . And a castellan has no right to make marriage pacts . " " My father, Arnolf, is Lord of Karhold . " " A son comes before an uncle by all the laws I know . " Cregan pushed himself to his feet and kicked aside the furs clinging to his ankles . " Harrion is dead . " Or will be soon . " A daughter comes before an uncle too . If her brother is dead, Karhold belongs to Lady Alys . And she has given her hand in marriage to Sigorn, Magnar of Thenn . " A wildling . A filthy, murdering wildling . Cregan ' s hands closed into fists . The gloves that covered them were leather, lined with fur to match the cloak that hung matted and stiff from his broad shoulders . His black wool surcoat was emblazoned with the white sunburst of his house . I see what you are, Snow . Half a wolf and half a wildling, baseborn get of a traitor and a whore . You would deliver a highborn maid to the bed of some stinking savage . Did you sample her yourself first? He laughed . If you mean to kill me, do it and be damned for a kinslayer . Stark and Karstark are one blood. " My name is Snow . " " Guilty . Of that, at least . " " Let this Magnar come to Karhold . We ' ll hack off his head and stuff it in a privy, so we can piss into his mouth . " Jon pointed out, [BOS] Sigorn leads two hundred Thenns, and Lady Alys believes Karhold will open its gates to her . Two of your men have already sworn her their service and confirmed all she had to say concerning the plans your father made with Ramsay Snow . You have close kin at Karhold, I am told . A word from you could save their lives . Yield the castle . Lady Alys will pardon the women who betrayed her and allow the men to take the black . [EOS]  Cregan shook his head . Chunks of ice had formed about the tangles in his hair, and clicked together softly when he moved . " Never, " he said . " Never, never, never . " I should make his head a wedding gift for Lady Alys and her Magnar, Jon thought, but dare not take the risk . The Night ' s Watch took no part in the quarrels of the realm; some would say he had already given Stannis too much help . Behead this fool, and they will claim I am killing northmen to give their lands to wildlings . Release him, and he will do his best to rip apart all I ' ve done with Lady Alys and the Magnar . Jon wondered what his father would do, how his uncle might deal with this . But Eddard Stark was dead, Benjen Stark lost in the frozen wilds beyond the Wall . You know nothing, Jon Snow. Never is a long time, Jon said . You may feel differently on the morrow, or a year from now . Soon or late King Stannis will return to the Wall, however . When he does he will have you put to death … unless it happens that you are wearing a black cloak . When a man takes the black, his crimes are wiped away . Even such a man as you . Now pray excuse me . I have a feast to attend. After the biting cold of the ice cells, the crowded cellar was so hot that Jon felt suffocated from the moment he came down the steps . The air smelled of smoke and roasting meat and mulled wine . Axell Florent was making a toast as Jon took his place upon the dais . " To King Stannis and his wife, Queen Selyse, Light of the North! " Ser Axell bellowed . " To R ' hllor, the Lord of Light, may he defend us all! One land, one god, one king! " " One land, one god, one king! " the queen ' s men echoed. Jon drank with the rest . Whether Alys Karstark would find any joy in her marriage he could not say, but this one night at least should be one of celebration. The stewards began to bring out the first dish, an onion broth flavored with bits of goat and carrot . Not precisely royal fare, but nourishing; it tasted good enough and warmed the belly . Owen the Oaf took up his fiddle, and several of the free folk joined in with pipes and drums . The same pipes and drums they played to sound Mance Rayder ' s attack upon the Wall . Jon thought they sounded sweeter now . With the broth came loaves of coarse brown bread, warm from the oven . Salt and butter sat upon the tables . The sight made Jon gloomy . They were well provided with salt, Bowen Marsh had told him, but the last of the butter would be gone within a moon ' s turn. Old Flint and The Norrey had been given places of high honor just below the dais . Both men had been too old to march with Stannis; they had sent their sons and grandsons in their stead . But they had been quick enough to descend on Castle Black for the wedding . Each had brought a wet nurse to the Wall as well . The Norrey woman was forty, with the biggest breasts Jon Snow had ever seen . The Flint girl was fourteen and flat-chested as a boy, though she did not lack for milk . Between the two of them, the child Val called Monster seemed to be thriving. For that much Jon was grateful … but he did not believe for a moment that two such hoary old warriors would have hied down from their hills for that alone . Each had brought a tail of fighting men—five for Old Flint, twelve for The Norrey, all clad in ragged skins and studded leathers, fearsome as the face of winter . Some had long beards, some had scars, some had both; all worshiped the old gods of the north, those same gods worshiped by the free folk beyond the Wall . Yet here they sat, drinking to a marriage hallowed by some queer red god from beyond the seas. Better that than refuse to drink . Neither Flint nor Norrey had turned their cups over to spill their wine upon the floor . That might betoken a certain acceptance . Or perhaps they just hate to waste good southron wine . They will not have tasted much of it up in those stony hills of theirs. Between courses, Ser Axell Florent led Queen Selyse out onto the floor to dance . Others followed—the queen ' s knights first, partnered with her ladies . Ser Brus gave Princess Shireen her first dance, then took a turn with her mother . Ser Narbert danced with each of Selyse ' s lady companions in turn. The queen ' s men outnumbered the queen ' s ladies three to one, so even the humblest serving girls were pressed into the dance . After a few songs some black brothers remembered skills learned at the courts and castles of their youth, before their sins had sent them to the Wall, and took the floor as well . That old rogue Ulmer of the Kingswood proved as adept at dancing as he was at archery, no doubt regaling his partners with his tales of the Kingswood Brotherhood, when he rode with Simon Toyne and Big Belly Ben and helped Wenda the White Fawn burn her mark in the buttocks of her highborn captives . Satin was all grace, dancing with three serving girls in turn but never presuming to approach a highborn lady . Jon judged that wise . He did not like the way some of the queen ' s knights were looking at the steward, particularly Ser Patrek of King ' s Mountain . That one wants to shed a bit of blood, he thought . He is looking for some provocation. When Owen the Oaf began to dance with Patchface the fool, laughter echoed off the vaulted ceiling . The sight made Lady Alys smile . " Do you dance often, here at Castle Black? " " Every time we have a wedding, my lady . " " You could dance with me, you know . It would be only courteous . You danced with me anon . " " Anon? " teased Jon. " When we were children . " She tore off a bit of bread and threw it at him . " As you know well . " " My lady should dance with her husband . " " My Magnar is not one for dancing, I fear . If you will not dance with me, at least pour me some of the mulled wine . " " As you command . " He signaled for a flagon. " So, " said Alys, as Jon poured, " I am now a woman wed. A wildling husband with his own little wildling army . " " Free folk is what they call themselves . Most, at least . The Thenns are a people apart, though . Very old . " Ygritte had told him that . You know nothing, Jon Snow . " They come from a hidden vale at the north end of the Frostfangs, surrounded by high peaks, and for thousands of years they ' ve had more truck with the giants than with other men . It made them different . " " Different, " she said, " but more like us . " " Aye, my lady . The Thenns have lords and laws . " They know how to kneel . " They mine tin and copper for bronze, forge their own arms and armor instead of stealing it . A proud folk, and brave . Mance Rayder had to best the old Magnar thrice before Styr would accept him as King-Beyond-the-Wall . " " And now they are here, on our side of the Wall . Driven from their mountain fastness and into my bedchamber . " She smiled a wry smile . " It is my own fault . My lord father told me I must charm your brother Robb, but I was only six and didn ' t know how . " Aye, but now you ' re almost six-and-ten, and we must pray you will know how to charm your new husband . " My lady, how do things stand at Karhold with your food stores? " " Not well . " Alys sighed . " My father took so many of our men south with him that only the women and young boys were left to bring the harvest in . Them, and the men too old or crippled to go off to war . Crops withered in the fields or were pounded into the mud by autumn rains . And now the snows are come . This winter will be hard . Few of the old people will survive it, and many children will perish as well . " It was a tale that any northmen knew well . Jon told her [BOS] My father ' s grandmother was a Flint of the mountains, on his mother ' s side, The First Flints, they call themselves . They say the other Flints are the blood of younger sons, who had to leave the mountains to find food and land and wives . It has always been a harsh life up there . When the snows fall and food grows scarce, their young must travel to the winter town or take service at one castle or the other . The old men gather up what strength remains in them and announce that they are going hunting . Some are found come spring . More are never seen again . [EOS]  " It is much the same at Karhold . " That did not surprise him . " When your stores begin to dwindle, my lady, remember us . Send your old men to the Wall, let them say our words . Here at least they will not die alone in the snow, with only memories to warm them . Send us boys as well, if you have boys to spare . " " As you say . " She touched his hand . " Karhold remembers . " The elk was being carved . It smelled better than Jon had any reason to expect . He dispatched a portion to Leathers out at Hardin ' s Tower, along with three big platters of roast vegetables for Wun Wun, then ate a healthy slice himself . Three-Finger Hobb ' s acquitted himself well . That had been a concern . Hobb had come to him two nights ago complaining that he ' d joined the Night ' s Watch to kill wildlings, not to cook for them . " Besides, I never done no wedding feast, m ' lord . Black brothers don ' t never take no wifes . It ' s in the bloody vows, I swear ' tis . " Jon was washing the roast down with a sip of mulled wine when Clydas appeared at his elbow [BOS] A bird, [EOS] he announced, and slipped a parchment into Jon ' s hand . The note was sealed with a dot of hard black wax . Eastwatch, Jon knew, even before he broke the seal . The letter had been written by Maester Harmune; Cotter Pyke could neither read nor write . But the words were Pyke ' s, set down as he had spoken them, blunt and to the point. Calm seas today . Eleven ships set sail for Hardhome on the morning tide . Three Braavosi, four Lyseni, four of ours . Two of the Lyseni barely seaworthy . We may drown more wildlings than we save . Your command . Twenty ravens aboard, and Maester Harmune . Will send reports . I command from Talon, Tattersalt second on Blackbird, Ser Glendon holds Eastwatch. " Dark wings, dark words? " asked Alys Karstark. " No, my lady . This news was long awaited . " Though the last part troubles me . Glendon Hewett was a seasoned man and a strong one, a sensible choice to command in Cotter Pyke ' s absence . But he was also as much a friend as Alliser Thorne could boast, and a crony of sorts with Janos Slynt, however briefly . Jon could still recall how Hewett had dragged him from his bed, and the feel of his boot slamming into his ribs . Not the man I would have chosen . He rolled the parchment up and slipped it into his belt. The fish course was next, but as the pike was being boned Lady Alys dragged the Magnar up onto the floor . From the way he moved it was plain that Sigorn had never danced before, but he had drunk enough mulled wine so that it did not seem to matter. " A northern maid and a wildling warrior, bound together by the Lord of Light . " Ser Axell Florent slipped into Lady Alys ' s vacant seat . " Her Grace approves . I am close to her, my lord, so I know her mind . King Stannis will approve as well . " Unless Roose Bolton has stuck his head on a spear. " Not all agree, alas . " Ser Axell ' s beard was a ragged brush beneath his sagging chin; coarse hair sprouted from his ears and nostrils . " Ser Patrek feels he would have made a better match for Lady Alys . His lands were lost to him when he came north . " " There are many in this hall who have lost far more than that, " said Jon, " and more who have given up their lives in service to the realm . Ser Patrek should count himself fortunate . " Axell Florent smiled . " The king might say the same if he were here . Yet some provision must be made for His Grace ' s leal knights, surely? They have followed him so far and at such cost . And we must needs bind these wildlings to king and realm . This marriage is a good first step, but I know that it would please the queen to see the wildling princess wed as well . " Jon sighed . He was weary of explaining that Val was no true princess . No matter how often he told them, they never seemed to hear [BOS] You are persistent, Ser Axell, I grant you that . [EOS]  " Do you blame me, my lord? Such a prize is not easily won . A nubile girl, I hear, and not hard to look upon . Good hips, good breasts, well made for whelping children . " " Who would father these children? Ser Patrek? You? " " Who better? We Florents have the blood of the old Gardener kings in our veins . Lady Melisandre could perform the rites, as she did for Lady Alys and the Magnar . " " All you are lacking is a bride . " Easily remedied . Florent ' s smile was so false that it looked painful . Where is she, Lord Snow? Have you moved her to one of your other castles? Greyguard or the Shadow Tower? Whore ' s Burrow, with t ' other wenches? He leaned close . Some say you have her tucked away for your own pleasure . It makes no matter to me, so long as she is not with child . I ' ll get my own sons on her . If you ' ve broken her to saddle, well … we are both men of the world, are we not? Jon had heard enough [BOS] Ser Axell, if you are truly the Queen ' s Hand, I pity Her Grace . [EOS]  Florent ' s face grew flushed with anger . " So it is true . You mean to keep her for yourself, I see it now . The bastard wants his father ' s seat . " The bastard refused his father ' s seat . If the bastard had wanted Val, all he had to do was ask for her . You must excuse me, ser, he said . I need a breath of fresh air . It stinks in here . His head turned . That was a horn. Others had heard it too . The music and the laughter died at once . Dancers froze in place, listening . Even Ghost pricked up his ears . " Did you hear that? " Queen Selyse asked her knights. " A warhorn, Your Grace, " said Ser Narbert. The queen ' s hand went fluttering to her throat . " Are we under attack? " " No, Your Grace, " said Ulmer of the Kingswood . " It ' s the watchers on the Wall, is all . " One blast, thought Jon Snow . Rangers returning. Then it came again . The sound seemed to fill the cellar. " Two blasts, " said Mully. Black brothers, northmen, free folk, Thenns, queen ' s men, all of them fell quiet, listening . Five heartbeats passed . Ten . Twenty . Then Owen the Oaf tittered, and Jon Snow could breathe again . " Two blasts, " he announced . " Wildlings . " Val. Tormund Giantsbane had come at last. He was not a tall man, Tormund Giantsbane, but the gods had given him a broad chest and massive belly . Mance Rayder had named him Tormund Horn-Blower for the power of his lungs, and was wont to say that Tormund could laugh the snow off mountaintops . In his wroth, his bellows reminded Jon of a mammoth trumpeting. That day Tormund bellowed often and loudly . He roared, he shouted, he slammed his fist against the table so hard that a flagon of water overturned and spilled . A horn of mead was never far from his hand, so the spittle he sprayed when making threats was sweet with honey . He called Jon Snow a craven, a liar, and a turncloak, cursed him for a black-hearted buggering kneeler, a robber, and a carrion crow, accused him of wanting to fuck the free folk up the arse . Twice he flung his drinking horn at Jon ' s head, though only after he had emptied it . Tormund was not the sort of man to waste good mead . Jon let it all wash over him . He never raised his own voice nor answered threat with threat, but neither did he give more ground than he had come prepared to give. Finally, as the shadows of the afternoon grew long outside the tent, Tormund Giantsbane—Tall-Talker, Horn-Blower, and Breaker of Ice, Tormund Thunderfist, Husband to Bears, Mead-King of Ruddy Hall, Speaker to Gods and Father of Hosts—thrust out his hand . " Done then, and may the gods forgive me . There ' s a hundred mothers never will, I know . " Jon clasped the offered hand . The words of his oath rang through his head . I am the sword in the darkness . I am the watcher on the walls . I am the fire that burns against the cold, the light that brings the dawn, the horn that wakes the sleepers, the shield that guards the realms of men . And for him a new refrain: I am the guard who opened the gates and let the foe march through . He would have given much and more to know that he was doing the right thing . But he had gone too far to turn back [BOS] Done and done, [EOS] he said. Tormund ' s grip was bone-crushing . That much had not changed about him . The beard was the same as well, though the face under that thicket of white hair had thinned considerably, and there were deep lines graven in those ruddy cheeks . " Mance should have killed you when he had the chance, " he said as he did his best to turn Jon ' s hand to pulp and bone . " Gold for gruel, and boys … a cruel price . Whatever happened to that sweet lad I knew? " They made him lord commander . " A fair bargain leaves both sides unhappy, I ' ve heard it said . Three days? " " If I live that long . Some o ' my own will spit on me when they hear these terms . " Tormund released Jon ' s hand . " Your crows will grumble too, if I know them . And I ought to . I have killed more o ' you black buggers than I can count . " " It might be best if you did not mention that so loudly when you come south of the Wall . " Har! Tormund laughed . That had not changed either; he still laughed easily and often . Wise words . I ' d not want you crows to peck me to death . He slapped Jon ' s back . When all my folk are safe behind your Wall, we ' ll share a bit o ' meat and mead . Till then … The wildling pulled off the band from his left arm and tossed it at Jon, then did the same with its twin upon his right . Your first payment . Had those from my father and him from his . Now they ' re yours, you thieving black bastard. The armbands were old gold, solid and heavy, engraved with the ancient runes of the First Men . Tormund Giantsbane had worn them as long as Jon had known him; they had seemed as much a part of him as his beard . " The Braavosi will melt these down for the gold . That seems a shame . Perhaps you ought to keep them . " " No . I ' ll not have it said that Tormund Thunderfist made the free folk give up their treasures whilst he kept his own . " He grinned . " But I ' ll keep the ring I wear about me member . Much bigger than those little things . On you it ' d be a torque . " Jon had to laugh [BOS] You never change . [EOS]  Oh, I do . The grin melted away like snow in summer . I am not the man I was at Ruddy Hall . Seen too much death, and worse things too . My sons … Grief twisted Tormund ' s face . Dormund was cut down in the battle for the Wall, and him still half a boy . One o ' your king ' s knights did for him, some bastard all in grey steel with moths upon his shield . I saw the cut, but my boy was dead before I reached him . And Torwynd … it was the cold claimed him . Always sickly, that one . He just up and died one night . The worst o ' it, before we ever knew he ' d died he rose pale with them blue eyes . Had to see to him m ' self . That was hard, Jon . Tears shone in his eyes . He wasn ' t much of a man, truth be told, but he ' d been me little boy once, and I loved him. Jon put a hand on his shoulder [BOS] I am so sorry . [EOS]  " Why? Weren ' t your doing . There ' s blood on your hands, aye, same as mine . But not his . " Tormund shook his head . " I still have two strong sons . " " Your daughter …? " Munda . That brought Tormund ' s smile back . Took that Longspear Ryk to husband, if you believe it . Boy ' s got more cock than sense, you ask me, but he treats her well enough . I told him if he ever hurt her, I ' d yank his member off and beat him bloody with it . He gave Jon another hearty slap . Time you were going back . Keep you any longer, they ' re like to think we ate you. " Dawn, then . Three days from now . The boys first . " " I heard you the first ten times, crow . A man ' d think there was no trust between us . " He spat . " Boys first, aye . Mammoths go the long way round . You make sure Eastwatch expects them . I ' ll make sure there ' s no fighting, nor rushing at your bloody gate . Nice and orderly we ' ll be, ducklings in a row . And me the mother duck . Har! " Tormund led Jon from his tent. Outside the day was bright and cloudless . The sun had returned to the sky after a fortnight ' s absence, and to the south the Wall rose blue-white and glittering . There was a saying Jon had heard from the older men at Castle Black: the Wall has more moods than Mad King Aerys, they ' d say, or sometimes, the Wall has more moods than a woman . On cloudy days it looked to be white rock . On moonless nights it was as black as coal . In snowstorms it seemed carved of snow . But on days like this, there was no mistaking it for anything but ice . On days like this the Wall shimmered bright as a septon ' s crystal, every crack and crevasse limned by sunlight, as frozen rainbows danced and died behind translucent ripples . On days like this the Wall was beautiful. Tormund ' s eldest son stood near the horses, talking with Leathers . Tall Toregg, he was called amongst the free folk . Though he barely had an inch on Leathers, he overtopped his father by a foot . Hareth, the strapping Mole ' s Town boy called Horse, huddled near the fire, his back to the other two . He and Leathers were the only men Jon had brought with him to the parley; any more might have been seen as a sign of fear, and twenty men would have been of no more use than two if Tormund had been intent on blood . Ghost was the only protection Jon needed; the direwolf could sniff out foes, even those who hid their enmity behind smiles. Ghost was gone, though . Jon peeled off one black glove, put two fingers in his mouth, and whistled . " Ghost! To me . " From above came the sudden sound of wings . Mormont ' s raven flapped from a limb of an old oak to perch upon Jon ' s saddle . " Corn, " it cried . " Corn, corn, corn . " Jon reached to shoo the bird away but ended up stroking its feathers . The raven cocked its eye at him [BOS] Did you follow me as well? Snow, [EOS] it muttered, bobbing its head knowingly . Then Ghost emerged from between two trees, with Val beside him. They look as though they belong together . Val was clad all in white; white woolen breeches tucked into high boots of bleached white leather, white bearskin cloak pinned at the shoulder with a carved weirwood face, white tunic with bone fastenings . Her breath was white as well … but her eyes were blue, her long braid the color of dark honey, her cheeks flushed red from the cold . It had been a long while since Jon Snow had seen a sight so lovely. " Have you been trying to steal my wolf? " he asked her. " Why not? If every woman had a direwolf, men would be much sweeter . Even crows . " " Har! " laughed Tormund Giantsbane . " Don ' t bandy words with this one, Lord Snow, she ' s too clever for the likes o ' you and me . Best steal her quick, before Toregg wakes up and takes her first . " What had that oaf Axell Florent said of Val? " A nubile girl, not hard to look upon . Good hips, good breasts, well made for whelping children . " All true enough, but the wildling woman was so much more . She had proved that by finding Tormund where seasoned rangers of the Watch had failed . She may not be a princess, but she would make a worthy wife for any lord. But that bridge had been burned a long time ago, and Jon himself had thrown the torch . " Toregg is welcome to her, " he announced . " I took a vow . " " She won ' t mind . Will you, girl? " Val patted the long bone knife on her hip . " Lord Crow is welcome to steal into my bed any night he dares . Once he ' s been gelded, keeping those vows will come much easier for him . " " Har! " Tormund snorted again . " You hear that, Toregg? Stay away from this one . I have one daughter, don ' t need another . " Shaking his head, the wildling chief ducked back inside his tent. As Jon scratched Ghost behind the ear, Toregg brought up Val ' s horse for her . She still rode the grey garron that Mully had given her the day she left the Wall, a shaggy, stunted thing blind in one eye . As she turned it toward the Wall, she asked, " How fares the little monster? " Jon mounted his own horse [BOS] Twice as big as when you left us, and thrice as loud . When he wants the teat, you can hear him wail in Eastwatch . [EOS]  Val fell in beside him . " So … I brought you Tormund, as I said I would . What now? Am I to be returned to my old cell? " " Your old cell is occupied . Queen Selyse has claimed the King ' s Tower, for her own . Do you remember Hardin ' s Tower? " " The one that looks about to collapse? " " It ' s looked that way for a hundred years . I ' ve had the top floor made ready for you, my lady . You will have more room than in the King ' s Tower, though you may not be as comfortable . No one has ever called it Hardin ' s Palace . " " I would choose freedom over comfort every time . " " Freedom of the castle you shall have, but I regret to say you must remain a captive . I can promise that you will not be troubled by unwanted visitors, however . My own men guard Hardin ' s Tower, not the queen ' s . And Wun Wun sleeps in the entry hall . " " A giant as protector? Even Dalla could not boast of that . " Tormund ' s wildlings watched them pass, peering out from tents and lean-tos beneath leafless trees . For every man of fighting age, Jon saw three women and as many children, gaunt-faced things with hollow cheeks and staring eyes . When Mance Rayder had led the free folk down upon the Wall, his followers drove large herds of sheep and goats and swine before them, but now the only animals to be seen were the mammoths . If not for the ferocity of the giants, those would have been slaughtered too, he did not doubt . There was a lot of meat on a mammoth ' s bones. Jon saw signs of sickness too . That disquieted him more than he could say . If Tormund ' s band were starved and sick, what of the thousands who had followed Mother Mole to Hardhome? Cotter Pyke should reach them soon . If the winds were kind, his fleet might well be on its way back to Eastwatch even now, with as many of the free folk as he could cram aboard. " How did you fare with Tormund? " asked Val. " Ask me a year from now . The hard part still awaits me . The part where I convince mine own to eat this meal I ' ve cooked for them . None of them are going to like the taste, I fear . " " Let me help . " " You have . You brought me Tormund . " " I can do more . " Why not? thought Jon . They are all convinced she is a princess . Val looked the part and rode as if she had been born on horseback . A warrior princess, he decided, not some willowy creature who sits up in a tower, brushing her hair and waiting for some knight to rescue her . " I must inform the queen of this agreement, " he said . " You are welcome to come meet her, if you can find it in yourself to bend a knee . " It would never do to offend Her Grace before he even opened his mouth. " May I laugh when I kneel? " " You may not . This is no game . A river of blood runs between our peoples, old and deep and red . Stannis Baratheon is one of the few who favors admitting wildlings to the realm . I need his queen ' s support for what I ' ve done . " Val ' s playful smile died . " You have my word, Lord Snow . I will be a proper wildling princess for your queen . " She is not my queen, he might have said . If truth be told, the day of her departure cannot come too fast for me . And if the gods are good, she will take Melisandre with her. They rode the rest of the way in silence, Ghost loping at their heels . Mormont ' s raven followed them as far as the gate, then flapped upward as the rest of them dismounted . Horse went ahead with a brand to light the way through the icy tunnel. A small crowd of black brothers was waiting by the gate when Jon and his companions emerged south of the Wall . Ulmer of the Kingswood was amongst them, and it was the old archer who came forward to speak for the rest . " If it please m ' lord, the lads were wondering . Will it be peace, m ' lord? Or blood and iron? " Peace, Jon Snow replied . Three days hence, Tormund Giantsbane will lead his people through the Wall . As friends, not foes . Some may even swell our ranks, as brothers . It will be for us to make them welcome . Now back to your duties . Jon handed the reins of his horse to Satin . I must see Queen Selyse . Her Grace would take it as a slight if he did not come to her at once . Afterward I will have letters to write . Bring parchment, quills, and a pot of maester ' s black to my chambers . Then summon Marsh, Yarwyck, Septon Cellador, Clydas . Cellador would be half-drunk, and Clydas was a poor substitute for a real maester, but they were what he had . Till Sam returns . The northmen too . Flint and Norrey . Leathers, you should be there as well. " Hobb is baking onion pies, " said Satin . " Shall I request that they all join you for supper? " Jon considered . " No . Ask them to join me atop the Wall at sunset . " He turned to Val . " My lady . With me, if you please . " " The crow commands, the captive must obey . " Her tone was playful . " This queen of yours must be fierce if the legs of grown men give out beneath them when they meet her . Should I have dressed in mail instead of wool and fur? These clothes were given to me by Dalla, I would sooner not get bloodstains all over them . " " If words drew blood, you might have cause to fear . I think your clothes are safe enough, my lady . " They made their way toward the King ' s Tower, along fresh-shoveled pathways between mounds of dirty snow . " I have heard it said that your queen has a great dark beard . " Jon knew he should not smile, but he did [BOS] Only a mustache . Very wispy . You can count the hairs . [EOS]  " How disappointing . " For all her talk about wanting to be mistress of her seat, Selyse Baratheon seemed in no great haste to abandon the comforts of Castle Black for the shadows of the Nightfort . She kept guards, of course—four men posted at the door, two outside on the steps, two inside by the brazier . Commanding them was Ser Patrek of King ' s Mountain, clad in his knightly raiment of white and blue and silver, his cloak a spatter of five-pointed stars . When presented to Val, the knight sank to one knee to kiss her glove . " You are even lovelier than I was told, princess, " he declared . " The queen has told me much and more of your beauty . " " How odd, when she has never seen me . " Val patted Ser Patrek on the head . " Up with you now, ser kneeler . Up, up . " She sounded as if she were talking to a dog. It was all that Jon could do not to laugh . Stone-faced, he told the knight that they required audience with the queen . Ser Patrek sent one of the men-at-arms scrambling up the steps to inquire as to whether Her Grace would receive them . " The wolf stays here, though, " Ser Patrek insisted. Jon had expected that . The direwolf made Queen Selyse anxious, almost as much as Wun Weg Wun Dar Wun [BOS] Ghost, stay . [EOS]  They found Her Grace sewing by the fire, whilst her fool danced about to music only he could hear, the cowbells on his antlers clanging . " The crow, the crow, " Patchface cried when he saw Jon . " Under the sea the crows are white as snow, I know, I know, oh, oh, oh . " Princess Shireen was curled up in a window seat, her hood drawn up to hide the worst of the greyscale that had disfigured her face. There was no sign of Lady Melisandre . For that much Jon was grateful . Soon or late he would need to face the red priestess, but he would sooner it was not in the queen ' s presence . " Your Grace . " He took a knee . Val did likewise. Queen Selyse set aside her sewing . " You may rise . " " If it please Your Grace, may I present the Lady Val? Her sister Dalla was— " " —mother to that squalling babe who keeps us awake at night . I know who she is, Lord Snow . " The queen sniffed . " You are fortunate that she returned to us before the king my husband, else it might have gone badly for you . Very badly indeed . " " Are you the wildling princess? " Shireen asked Val. " Some call me that, " said Val . " My sister was wife to Mance Rayder, the King-Beyond-the-Wall . She died giving him a son . " " I ' m a princess too, " Shireen announced, " but I never had a sister . I used to have a cousin once, before he sailed away . He was just a bastard, but I liked him . " " Honestly, Shireen, " her mother said . " I am sure the lord commander did not come to hear about Robert ' s by-blows . Patchface, be a good fool and take the princess to her room . " The bells on his hat rang . " Away, away, " the fool sang . " Come with me beneath the sea, away, away, away . " He took the little princess by one hand and drew her from the room, skipping. Jon said, [BOS] Your Grace, the leader of the free folk has agreed to my terms . [EOS]  Queen Selyse gave the tiniest of nods . " It was ever my lord husband ' s wish to grant sanctuary to these savage peoples . So long as they keep the king ' s peace and the king ' s laws, they are welcome in our realm . " She pursed her lips . " I am told they have more giants with them . " Val answered . " Almost two hundred of them, Your Grace . And more than eighty mammoths . " The queen shuddered . " Dreadful creatures . " Jon could not tell if she was speaking of the mammoths or the giants . " Though such beasts might be useful to my lord husband in his battles . " Jon said, [BOS] That may be, Your Grace, but the mammoths are too big to pass through our gate . [EOS]  " Cannot the gate be widened? " " That … that would be unwise, I think . " Selyse sniffed . " If you say so . No doubt you know about such things . Where do you mean to settle these wildlings? Surely Mole ' s Town is not large enough to contain … how many are they? " " Four thousand, Your Grace . They will help us garrison our abandoned castles, the better to defend the Wall . " " I had been given to understand that those castles were ruins . Dismal places, bleak and cold, hardly more than heaps of rubble . At Eastwatch we heard talk of rats and spiders . " The cold will have killed the spiders by now, thought Jon, and the rats may be a useful source of meat come winter . " All true, Your Grace … but even ruins offer some shelter . And the Wall will stand between them and the Others . " " I see you have considered all this carefully, Lord Snow . I am sure King Stannis will be pleased when he returns triumphant from his battle . " Assuming he returns at all. " Of course, " the queen went on, " the wildlings must first acknowledge Stannis as their king and R ' hllor as their god . " And here we are, face-to-face in the narrow passage . " Your Grace, forgive me . Those were not the terms that we agreed to . " The queen ' s face hardened . " A grievous oversight . " What faint traces of warmth her voice had held vanished all at once. " Free folk do not kneel, " Val told her. " Then they must be knelt, " the queen declared. " Do that, Your Grace, and we will rise again at the first chance, " Val promised . " Rise with blades in hand . " The queen ' s lips tightened, and her chin gave a small quiver . " You are insolent . I suppose that is only to be expected of a wildling . We must find you a husband who can teach you courtesy . " The queen turned her glare on Jon . " I do not approve, Lord Commander . Nor will my lord husband . I cannot prevent you from opening your gate, as we both know full well, but I promise you that you shall answer for it when the king returns from battle . Mayhaps you might want to reconsider . " " Your Grace . " Jon knelt again . This time Val did not join him . " I am sorry my actions have displeased you . I did as I thought best . Do I have your leave to go? " " You do . At once . " Once outside and well away from the queen ' s men, Val gave vent to her wroth . " You lied about her beard . That one has more hair on her chin than I have between my legs . And the daughter … her face … " " The grey death is what we call it . " " It is not always mortal in children . " " North of the Wall it is . Hemlock is a sure cure, but a pillow or a blade will work as well . If I had given birth to that poor child, I would have given her the gift of mercy long ago . " This was a Val that Jon had never seen before . " Princess Shireen is the queen ' s only child . " " I pity both of them . The child is not clean . " " If Stannis wins his war, Shireen will stand as heir to the Iron Throne . " " Then I pity your Seven Kingdoms . " " The maesters say greyscale is not— " " The maesters may believe what they wish . Ask a woods witch if you would know the truth . The grey death sleeps, only to wake again . The child is not clean! " " She seems a sweet girl . You cannot know— " " I can . You know nothing, Jon Snow . " Val seized his arm . " I want the monster out of there . Him and his wet nurses . You cannot leave them in that same tower as the dead girl . " Jon shook her hand away [BOS] She is not dead . [EOS]  " She is . Her mother cannot see it . Nor you, it seems . Yet death is there . " She walked away from him, stopped, turned back . " I brought you Tormund Giantsbane . Bring me my monster . " " If I can, I will . " " Do . You owe me a debt, Jon Snow . " Jon watched her stride away . She is wrong . She must be wrong . Greyscale is not so deadly as she claims, not in children. Ghost was gone again . The sun was low in the west . A cup of hot spiced wine would serve me well just now . Two cups would serve me even better . But that would have to wait . He had foes to face . Foes of the worst sort: brothers. He found Leathers waiting for him by the winch cage . The two of them rode up together . The higher they went, the stronger the wind . Fifty feet up, the heavy cage began to sway with every gust . From time to time it scraped against the Wall, starting small crystalline showers of ice that sparkled in the sunlight as they fell . They rose above the tallest towers of the castle . At four hundred feet the wind had teeth, and tore at his black cloak so it slapped noisily at the iron bars . At seven hundred it cut right through him . The Wall is mine, Jon reminded himself as the winchmen were swinging in the cage, for two more days, at least. Jon hopped down onto the ice, thanked the men on the winch, and nodded to the spearmen standing sentry . Both wore woolen hoods pulled down over their heads, so nothing could be seen of their faces but their eyes, but he knew Ty by the tangled rope of greasy black hair falling down his back and Owen by the sausage stuffed into the scabbard at his hip . He might have known them anyway, just by the way they stood . A good lord must know his men, his father had once told him and Robb, back at Winterfell. Jon walked to the edge of the Wall and gazed down upon the killing ground where Mance Rayder ' s host had died . He wondered where Mance was now . Did he ever find you, little sister? Or were you just a ploy he used so I would set him free? It had been so long since he had last seen Arya . What would she look like now? Would he even know her? Arya Underfoot . Her face was always dirty . Would she still have that little sword he ' d had Mikken forge for her? Stick them with the pointy end, he ' d told her . Wisdom for her wedding night if half of what he heard of Ramsay Snow was true . Bring her home, Mance . I saved your son from Melisandre, and now I am about to save four thousand of your free folk . You owe me this one little girl. In the haunted forest to the north, the shadows of the afternoon crept through the trees . The western sky was a blaze of red, but to the east the first stars were peeking out . Jon Snow flexed the fingers of his sword hand, remembering all he ' d lost . Sam, you sweet fat fool, you played me a cruel jape when you made me lord commander . A lord commander has no friends. " Lord Snow? " said Leathers . " The cage is coming up . " Jon moved back from the edge [BOS] I hear it . [EOS]  First to make the ascent were the clan chiefs Flint and Norrey, clad in fur and iron . The Norrey looked like some old fox—wrinkled and slight of build, but sly-eyed and spry . Torghen Flint was half a head shorter but must weigh twice as much—a stout gruff man with gnarled, red-knuckled hands as big as hams, leaning heavily on a blackthorn cane as he limped across the ice . Bowen Marsh came next, bundled up in a bearskin . After him Othell Yarwyck . Then Septon Cellador, half in his cups. Jon told them . They walked west along the Wall, down gravel-strewn paths toward the setting sun . When they had come fifty yards from the warming shed, he said, [BOS] Walk with me, You know why I ' ve summoned you . Three days hence at dawn the gate will open, to allow Tormund and his people through the Wall . There is much we need to do in preparation . [EOS]  Silence greeted his pronouncement . Then Othell Yarwyck said, " Lord Commander, there are thousands of— " Jon pointed at the lights of their campfires [BOS] —scrawny wildlings, bone weary, hungry, far from home . There they are . Four thousand, Tormund claims . [EOS]  " Three thousand, I make them, by the fires . " Bowen Marsh lived for counts and measures . " More than twice that number at Hardhome with the woods witch, we are told . And Ser Denys writes of great camps in the mountains beyond the Shadow Tower … " Jon did not deny it [BOS] Tormund says the Weeper means to try the Bridge of Skulls again . [EOS]  The Old Pomegranate touched his scar . He had gotten it defending the Bridge of Skulls the last time the Weeping Man had tried to cut his way across the Gorge . " Surely the lord commander cannot mean to allow that … that demon through as well? " " Not gladly . " Jon had not forgotten the heads the Weeping Man had left him, with bloody holes where their eyes had been . Black Jack Bulwer, Hairy Hal, Garth Greyfeather . I cannot avenge them, but I will not forget their names . " But yes, my lord, him as well . We cannot pick and choose amongst the free folk, saying this one may pass, this one may not . Peace means peace for all . " The Norrey hawked and spat . " As well make peace with wolves and carrion crows . " " It ' s peaceful in my dungeons, " grumbled Old Flint . " Give the Weeping Man to me . " " How many rangers has the Weeper killed? " asked Othell Yarwyck . " How many women has he raped or killed or stolen? " " Three of mine own ilk, " said Old Flint . " And he blinds the girls he does not take . " Jon reminded them [BOS] When a man takes the black, his crimes are forgiven, If we want the free folk to fight beside us, we must pardon their past crimes as we would for our own . [EOS]  " The Weeper will not say the words, " insisted Yarwyck . " He will not wear the cloak . Even other raiders do not trust him . " " You need not trust a man to use him . " Else how could I make use of all of you? " We need the Weeper, and others like him . Who knows the wild better than a wildling? Who knows our foes better than a man who has fought them? " " All the Weeper knows is rape and murder, " said Yarwyck. " Once past the Wall, the wildlings will have thrice our numbers, " said Bowen Marsh . " And that is only Tormund ' s band . Add the Weeper ' s men and those at Hardhome, and they will have the strength to end the Night ' s Watch in a single night . " " Numbers alone do not win a war . You have not seen them . Half of them are dead on their feet . " " I would sooner have them dead in the ground, " said Yarwyck . " If it please my lord . " " It does not please me . " Jon ' s voice was as cold as the wind snapping at their cloaks . " There are children in that camp, hundreds of them, thousands . Women as well . " " Some . Along with mothers and grandmothers, widows and maids … would you condemn them all to die, my lord? " " Brothers should not squabble, " Septon Cellador said . " Let us kneel and pray to the Crone to light our way to wisdom . " " Lord Snow, " said The Norrey, " where do you mean to put these wildlings o ' yours? Not on my lands, I hope . " " Aye, " declared Old Flint . " You want them in the Gift, that ' s your folly, but see they don ' t wander off or I ' ll send you back their heads . Winter is nigh, I want no more mouths to feed . " The wildlings will remain upon the Wall, Jon assured them . Most will be housed in one of our abandoned castles . The Watch now had garrisons at Icemark, Long Barrow, Sable Hall, Greyguard, and Deep Lake, all badly undermanned, but ten castles still stood empty and abandoned . Men with wives and children, all orphan girls and any orphan boys below the age of ten, old women, widowed mothers, any woman who does not care to fight . The spearwives we ' ll send to Long Barrow to join their sisters, single men to the other forts we ' ve reopened . Those who take the black will remain here, or be posted to Eastwatch or the Shadow Tower . Tormund will take Oakenshield as his seat, to keep him close at hand. Bowen Marsh sighed . " If they do not slay us with their swords, they will do so with their mouths . Pray, how does the lord commander propose to feed Tormund and his thousands? " Jon had anticipated that question [BOS] Through Eastwatch . We will bring in food by ship, as much as might be required . From the riverlands and the stormlands and the Vale of Arryn, from Dorne and the Reach, across the narrow sea from the Free Cities . [EOS]  " And this food will be paid for … how, if I may ask? " With gold, from the Iron Bank of Braavos, Jon might have replied . Instead he said, " I have agreed that the free folk may keep their furs and pelts . They will need those for warmth when winter comes . All other wealth they must surrender . Gold and silver, amber, gemstones, carvings, anything of value . We will ship it all across the narrow sea to be sold in the Free Cities . " " All the wealth o ' the wildlings, " said The Norrey . " That should buy you a bushel o ' barleycorn . Two bushels, might be . " " Lord Commander, why not demand that the wildlings give up their arms as well? " asked Clydas. Leathers laughed at that . " You want the free folk to fight beside you against the common foe . How are we to do that without arms? Would you have us throw snowballs at the wights? Or will you give us sticks to hit them with? " The arms most wildlings carry are little more than sticks, thought Jon . Wooden clubs, stone axes, mauls, spears with fire-hardened points, knives of bone and stone and dragonglass, wicker shields, bone armor, boiled leather . The Thenns worked bronze, and raiders like the Weeper carried stolen steel and iron swords looted off some corpse … but even those were oft of ancient vintage, dinted from years of hard use and spotted with rust. Jon said [BOS] Tormund Giantsbane will never willingly disarm his people, He is not the Weeping Man, but he is no craven either . If I had asked that of him, it would have come to blood . [EOS]  The Norrey fingered his beard . " You may put your wildlings in these ruined forts, Lord Snow, but how will you make them stay? What is there to stop them moving south to fairer, warmer lands? " " Our lands, " said Old Flint. " Tormund has given me his oath . He will serve with us until the spring . The Weeper and their other captains will swear the same or we will not let them pass . " Old Flint shook his head . " They will betray us . " " The Weeper ' s word is worthless, " said Othell Yarwyck. " These are godless savages, " said Septon Cellador . " Even in the south the treachery of wildlings is renowned . " Leathers crossed his arms . " That battle down below? I was on t ' other side, remember? Now I wear your blacks and train your boys to kill . Some might call me turncloak . Might be so … but I am no more savage than you crows . We have gods too . The same gods they keep in Winterfell . " " The gods of the North, since before this Wall was raised, " said Jon . " Those are the gods that Tormund swore by . He will keep his word . I know him, as I knew Mance Rayder . I marched with them for a time, you may recall . " " I had not forgotten, " said the Lord Steward. No, thought Jon, I did not think you had. " Mance Rayder swore an oath as well, " Marsh went on . " He vowed to wear no crowns, take no wife, father no sons . Then he turned his cloak, did all those things, and led a fearsome host against the realm . It is the remnants of that host that waits beyond the Wall . " " Broken remnants . " " A broken sword can be reforged . A broken sword can kill . " Jon said, [BOS] The free folk have neither laws nor lords, but they love their children . Will you admit that much? [EOS]  " It is not their children who concern us . We fear the fathers, not the sons . " " As do I . So I insisted upon hostages . " I am not the trusting fool you take me for … nor am I half wildling, no matter what you believe . " One hundred boys between the ages of eight and sixteen . A son from each of their chiefs and captains, the rest chosen by lot . The boys will serve as pages and squires, freeing our own men for other duties . Some may choose to take the black one day . Queerer things have happened . The rest will stand hostage for the loyalty of their sires . " The northmen glanced at one another . " Hostages, " mused The Norrey . " Tormund has agreed to this? " It was that, or watch his people die . " My blood price, he called it, " said Jon Snow, " but he will pay . " " Aye, and why not? " Old Flint stomped his cane against the ice . " Wards, we always called them, when Winterfell demanded boys of us, but they were hostages, and none the worse for it . " " None but them whose sires displeased the Kings o ' Winter, " said The Norrey . " Those came home shorter by a head . So you tell me, boy … if these wildling friends o ' yours prove false, do you have the belly to do what needs be done? " Ask Janos Slynt . " Tormund Giantsbane knows better than to try me . I may seem a green boy in your eyes, Lord Norrey, but I am still a son of Eddard Stark . " Yet even that did not appease his Lord Steward . " You say these boys will serve as squires . Surely the lord commander does not mean they will be trained at arms? " Jon ' s anger flared [BOS] No, my lord, I mean to set them to sewing lacy smallclothes . Of course they shall be trained at arms . They shall also churn butter, hew firewood, muck stables, empty chamber pots, and run messages … and in between they will be drilled with spear and sword and longbow . [EOS]  Marsh flushed a deeper shade of red . " The lord commander must pardon my bluntness, but I have no softer way to say this . What you propose is nothing less than treason . For eight thousand years the men of the Night ' s Watch have stood upon the Wall and fought these wildlings . Now you mean to let them pass, to shelter them in our castles, to feed them and clothe them and teach them how to fight . Lord Snow, must I remind you? You swore an oath . " Jon said the words [BOS] I know what I swore . I am the sword in the darkness . I am the watcher on the walls . I am the fire that burns against the cold, the light that brings the dawn, the horn that wakes the sleepers, the shield that guards the realms of men . Were those the same words you said when you took your vows? [EOS]  " They were . As the lord commander knows . " Jon waited for an answer . None came [BOS] Are you certain that I have not forgotten some? The ones about the king and his laws, and how we must defend every foot of his land and cling to each ruined castle? How does that part go? I am the shield that guards the realms of men . Those are the words . So tell me, my lord—what are these wildlings, if not men? [EOS]  Bowen Marsh opened his mouth . No words came out . A flush crept up his neck. Jon Snow turned away . The last light of the sun had begun to fade . He watched the cracks along the Wall go from red to grey to black, from streaks of fire to rivers of black ice . Down below, Lady Melisandre would be lighting her nightfire and chanting, Lord of Light, defend us, for the night is dark and full of terrors. Jon said at last, breaking the awkward silence, [BOS] Winter is coming, and with it the white walkers . The Wall is where we stop them . The Wall was made to stop them … but the Wall must be manned . This discussion is at an end . We have much to do before the gate is opened . Tormund and his people will need to be fed and clothed and housed . Some are sick and will need nursing . Those will fall to you, Clydas . Save as many as you can . [EOS]  Clydas blinked his dim pink eyes . " I will do my best, Jon . My lord, I mean . " " We will need every cart and wagon made ready to transport the free folk to their new homes . Othell, you shall see to that . " Yarwyck grimaced . " Aye, Lord Commander . " " Lord Bowen, you shall collect the tolls . The gold and silver, the amber, the torques and armbands and necklaces . Sort it all, count it, see that it reaches Eastwatch safely . " " Yes, Lord Snow, " said Bowen Marsh. And Jon thought, " Ice, " she said, " and daggers in the dark . Blood frozen red and hard, and naked steel . " His sword hand flexed . The wind was rising. That night he dreamt of wildlings howling from the woods, advancing to the moan of warhorns and the roll of drums . Boom DOOM boom DOOM boom DOOM came the sound, a thousand hearts with a single beat . Some had spears and some had bows and some had axes . Others rode on chariots made of bones, drawn by teams of dogs as big as ponies . Giants lumbered amongst them, forty feet tall, with mauls the size of oak trees. Stand fast, Jon Snow called . Throw them back . He stood atop the Wall, alone . Flame, he cried, feed them flame, but there was no one to pay heed. They are all gone . They have abandoned me. Burning shafts hissed upward, trailing tongues of fire . Scarecrow brothers tumbled down, black cloaks ablaze . " Snow, " an eagle cried, as foemen scuttled up the ice like spiders . Jon was armored in black ice, but his blade burned red in his fist . As the dead men reached the top of the Wall he sent them down to die again . He slew a greybeard and a beardless boy, a giant, a gaunt man with filed teeth, a girl with thick red hair . Too late he recognized Ygritte . She was gone as quick as she ' d appeared. The world dissolved into a red mist . Jon stabbed and slashed and cut . He hacked down Donal Noye and gutted Deaf Dick Follard . Qhorin Halfhand stumbled to his knees, trying in vain to staunch the flow of blood from his neck . Jon screamed . It was Robb before him now, his hair wet with melting snow . Longclaw took his head off . Then a gnarled hand seized Jon roughly by the shoulder . He whirled … [BOS] I am the Lord of Winterfell, [EOS]  … and woke with a raven pecking at his chest . " Snow, " the bird cried . Jon swatted at it . The raven shrieked its displeasure and flapped up to a bedpost to glare down balefully at him through the predawn gloom. The day had come . It was the hour of the wolf . Soon enough the sun would rise, and four thousand wildlings would come pouring through the Wall . Madness . Jon Snow ran his burned hand through his hair and wondered once again what he was doing . Once the gate was opened there would be no turning back . It should have been the Old Bear to treat with Tormund . It should have been Jaremy Rykker or Qhorin Halfhand or Denys Mallister or some other seasoned man . It should have been my uncle . It was too late for such misgivings, though . Every choice had its risks, every choice its consequences . He would play the game to its conclusion. He rose and dressed in darkness, as Mormont ' s raven muttered across the room . Corn, the bird said, and, King, and, Snow, Jon Snow, Jon Snow . That was queer . The bird had never said his full name before, as best Jon could recall. He broke his fast in the cellar with his officers . Fried bread, fried eggs, blood sausages, and barley porridge made up the meal, washed down with thin yellow beer . As they ate they went over the preparations yet again . " All is in readiness, " Bowen Marsh assured him . " If the wildlings uphold the terms of the bargain, all will go as you ' ve commanded . " And if not, it may turn to blood and carnage . Jon said, [BOS] Remember, Tormund ' s people are hungry, cold, and fearful . Some of them hate us as much as some of you hate them . We are dancing on rotten ice here, them and us . One crack, and we all drown . If blood should be shed today, it had best not be one of us who strikes the first blow, or I swear by the old gods and the new that I will have the head of the man who strikes it . [EOS]  They answered him with ayes and nods and muttered words, with As you command, and It will be done, and Yes, my lord . And one by one they rose and buckled on their swords and donned their warm black cloaks and strode out into the cold. Last to leave the table was Dolorous Edd Tollett, who had come in during the night with six wagons from the Long Barrow . Whore ' s Barrow, the black brothers called the fortress now . Edd had been sent to gather up as many spearwives as his wagons would hold and bring them back to join their sisters. Jon watched him mop up a runny yolk with a chunk of bread . It was strangely comforting to see Edd ' s dour face again [BOS] How goes the restoration work? [EOS] he asked his old steward. " Ten more years should do it, " Tollett replied in his usual gloomy tone . " Place was overrun with rats when we moved in . The spearwives killed the nasty buggers . Now the place is overrun with spearwives . There ' s days I want the rats back . " Jon asked [BOS] How do you find serving under Iron Emmett? [EOS]  " Mostly it ' s Black Maris serving under him, m ' lord . Me, I have the mules . Nettles claims we ' re kin . It ' s true we have the same long face, but I ' m not near as stubborn . Anyway I never knew their mothers, on my honor . " He finished the last of his eggs and sighed . " I do like me a nice runny egg . If it please m ' lord, don ' t let the wildlings eat all our chickens . " Out in the yard, the eastern sky had just begun to lighten . There was not a wisp of cloud in sight . Jon said [BOS] We have a good day for this, it would seem, A bright day, warm and sunny . [EOS]  " The Wall will weep . And winter almost on us . It ' s unnatural, m ' lord . A bad sign, you ask me . " Jon smiled [BOS] And if it were to snow? [EOS]  " A worse sign . " " What sort of weather would you prefer? " " The sort they keep indoors, " said Dolorous Edd . " If it please m ' lord, I should get back to my mules . They miss me when I ' m gone . More than I can say for them spearwives . " They parted there, Tollett for the east road, where his wagons waited, Jon Snow for the stables . Satin had his horse saddled and bridled and waiting for him, a fiery grey courser with a mane as black and shiny as maester ' s ink . He was not the sort of mount that Jon would have chosen for a ranging, but on this morning all that mattered was that he look impressive, and for that the stallion was a perfect choice. His tail was waiting too . Jon had never liked surrounding himself with guards, but today it seemed prudent to keep a few good men beside him . They made a grim display in their ringmail, iron halfhelms, and black cloaks, with tall spears in their hands and swords and daggers on their belts . For this Jon had passed over all the green boys and greybeards in his command, choosing eight men in their prime: Ty and Mully, Left Hand Lew, Big Liddle, Rory, Fulk the Flea, Garrett Greenspear . And Leathers, Castle Black ' s new master-at-arms, to show the free folk that even a man who had fought for Mance in the battle beneath the Wall could find a place of honor in the Night ' s Watch. A deep red blush had appeared in the east by the time they all assembled at the gate . The stars are going out, Jon thought . When next they reappeared, they would be shining down upon a world forever changed . A few queen ' s men stood watching from beside the embers of Lady Melisandre ' s nightfire . When Jon glanced at the King ' s Tower, he glimpsed a flash of red behind a window . Of Queen Selyse he saw no sign. It was time . " Open the gate, " Jon Snow said softly. " OPEN THE GATE! " Big Liddle roared . His voice was thunder. Seven hundred feet above, the sentries heard and raised their warhorns to their lips . The sound rang out, echoing off the Wall and out across the world . Ah​oo​oo​oo​oo​oo​oo​oo​oo​oo​oo​oo​oo​ooo​ooo . One long blast . For a thousand years or more, that sound had meant rangers coming home . Today it meant something else . Today it called the free folk to their new homes. On either end of the long tunnel, gates swung open and iron bars unlocked . Dawn light shimmered on the ice above, pink and gold and purple . Dolorous Edd had not been wrong . The Wall would soon be weeping . Gods grant it weeps alone. Satin led them underneath the ice, lighting the way through the gloom of the tunnel with an iron lantern . Jon followed, leading his horse . Then his guardsmen . After them came Bowen Marsh and his stewards, a score of them, every man assigned a task . Above, Ulmer of the Kingswood had the Wall . Two score of Castle Black ' s best bowmen stood with him, ready to respond to any trouble down below with a rain of arrows. North of the Wall, Tormund Giantsbane was waiting, mounted on a runty little garron that looked far too weedy to support his weight . His two remaining sons were with him, tall Toregg and young Dryn, along with three score warriors. " Har! " Tormund called . " Guards, is it? Now where ' s the trust in that, crow? " " You brought more men than I did . " " So I did . Come here by me, lad . I want my folk to see you . I got thousands ne ' er saw a lord commander, grown men who were told as boys that your rangers would eat them if they didn ' t behave . They need to see you plain, a long-faced lad in an old black cloak . They need to learn that the Night ' s Watch is naught t ' be feared . " That is a lesson I would sooner they never learned . Jon peeled the glove off his burned hand, put two fingers in his mouth, and whistled . Ghost came racing from the gate . Tormund ' s horse shied so hard that the wildling almost lost his saddle . Jon said [BOS] Naught to be feared? Ghost, stay . [EOS]  " You are a black-hearted bastard, Lord Crow . " Tormund Horn-Blower lifted his own warhorn to his lips . The sound of it echoed off the ice like rolling thunder, and the first of the free folk began to stream toward the gate. From dawn till dusk Jon watched the wildlings pass. The hostages went first—one hundred boys between the ages of eight and sixteen . " Your blood price, Lord Crow, " Tormund declared . " I hope the wailing o ' their poor mothers don ' t haunt your dreams at night . " Some of the boys were led to the gate by a mother or a father, others by older siblings . More came alone . Fourteen- and fifteen-year-old boys were almost men, and did not want to be seen clinging to a woman ' s skirts. Two stewards counted the boys as they went by, noting each name on long sheepskin scrolls . A third collected their valuables for the toll and wrote that down as well . The boys were going to a place that none had ever been before, to serve an order that had been the enemy of their kith and kin for thousands of years, yet Jon saw no tears, heard no wailing mothers . These are winter ' s people, he reminded himself . Tears freeze upon your cheeks where they come from . Not a single hostage balked or tried to slink away when his turn came to enter that gloomy tunnel. Almost all the boys were thin, some past the point of gauntness, with spindly shanks and arms like twigs . That was no more than Jon expected . Elsewise they came in every shape and size and color . He saw tall boys and short boys, brown-haired boys and black-haired boys, honey blonds and strawberry blonds and redheads kissed by fire, like Ygritte . He saw boys with scars, boys with limps, boys with pockmarked faces . Many of the older boys had downy cheeks or wispy little mustachios, but there was one fellow with a beard as thick as Tormund ' s . Some dressed in fine soft furs, some in boiled leather and oddments of armor, more in wool and sealskins, a few in rags . One was naked . Many had weapons: sharpened spears, stone-headed mauls, knives made of bone or stone or dragonglass, spiked clubs, tanglenets, even here and there a rust-eaten old sword . The Hornfoot boys walked blithe and barefoot through the snowdrifts . Other lads had bear-paws on their boots and walked on top of the same drifts, never sinking through the crust . Six boys arrived on horses, two on mules . A pair of brothers turned up with a goat . The biggest hostage was six-and-a-half feet tall but had a baby ' s face; the smallest was a runty boy who claimed nine years but looked no more than six. Of special note were the sons of men of renown . Tormund took care to point them out as they went by . The boy there is the son of Soren Shieldbreaker, he said of one tall lad . Him with the red hair, he ' s Gerrick Kingsblood ' s get . Comes o ' the line o ' Raymun Redbeard, to hear him tell it . The line o ' Redbeard ' s little brother, you want it true . Two boys looked enough alike to be twins, but Tormund insisted they were cousins, born a year apart . One was sired by Harle the Huntsman, t ' other by Harle the Handsome, both on the same woman . Fathers hate each other . I was you, I ' d send one to Eastwatch and t ' other to your Shadow Tower. Other hostages were named as sons of Howd Wanderer, of Brogg, of Devyn Sealskinner, Kyleg of the Wooden Ear, Morna White Mask, the Great Walrus … " The Great Walrus? Truly? " " They have queer names along the Frozen Shore . " Three hostages were sons of Alfyn Crowkiller, an infamous raider slain by Qhorin Halfhand . Or so Tormund insisted . Jon observed [BOS] They do not look like brothers, [EOS]  " Half-brothers, born o ' different mothers . Alfyn ' s member was a wee thing, even smaller than yours, but he was never shy with where he stuck it . Had a son in every village, that one . " Of a certain runty rat-faced boy, Tormund said, " That one ' s a whelp of Varamyr Sixskins . You remember Varamyr, Lord Crow? " He did . " The skinchanger . " " Aye, he was that . A vicious little runt besides . Dead now, like as not . No one ' s seen him since the battle . " Two of the boys were girls in disguise . When Jon saw them, he dispatched Rory and Big Liddle to bring them to him . One came meekly enough, the other kicking and biting . This could end badly . " Do these two have famous fathers? " " Har! Them skinny things? Not likely . Picked by lot . " " They ' re girls . " " Are they? " Tormund squinted at the pair of them from his saddle . " Me and Lord Crow made a wager on which o ' you has the biggest member . Pull them breeches down, give us a look . " One of the girls turned red . The other glared defiantly . " You leave us alone, Tormund Giantstink . You let us go . " " Har! You win, crow . Not a cock between ' em . The little one ' s got her a set o ' balls, though . A spearwife in the making, her . " He called to his own men . " Go find them something girly to put on before Lord Snow wets his smallclothes . " " I ' ll need two boys to take their places . " " How ' s that? " Tormund scratched his beard . " A hostage is a hostage, seems to me . That big sharp sword o ' yours can snick a girl ' s head off as easy as a boy ' s . A father loves his daughters too . Well, most fathers . " It is not their fathers who concern me . " Did Mance ever sing of Brave Danny Flint? " " Not as I recall . Who was he? " " A girl who dressed up like a boy to take the black . Her song is sad and pretty . What happened to her wasn ' t. " In some versions of the song, her ghost still walked the Nightfort . " I ' ll send the girls to Long Barrow . " The only men there were Iron Emmett and Dolorous Edd, both of whom he trusted . That was not something he could say of all his brothers. The wildling understood . " Nasty birds, you crows . " He spat . " Two more boys, then . You ' ll have them . " When nine-and-ninety hostages had shuffled by them to pass beneath the Wall, Tormund Giantsbane produced the last one . " My son Dryn . You ' ll see he ' s well taken care of, crow, or I ' ll cook your black liver up and eat it . " Jon gave the boy a close inspection . Bran ' s age, or the age he would have been if Theon had not killed him . Dryn had none of Bran ' s sweetness, though . He was a chunky boy, with short legs, thick arms, and a wide red face—a miniature version of his father, with a shock of dark brown hair [BOS] He ' ll serve as my own page, [EOS] Jon promised Tormund. " Hear that, Dryn? See that you don ' t get above yourself . " To Jon he said, " He ' ll need a good beating from time to time . Be careful o ' his teeth, though . He bites . " He reached down for his horn again, raised it, and blew another blast. This time it was warriors who came forward . And not just one hundred of them . Five hundred, Jon Snow judged, as they moved out from beneath the trees, perhaps as many as a thousand . One in every ten of them came mounted but all of them came armed . Across their backs they bore round wicker shields covered with hides and boiled leather, displaying painted images of snakes and spiders, severed heads, bloody hammers, broken skulls, and demons . A few were clad in stolen steel, dinted oddments of armor looted from the corpses of fallen rangers . Others had armored themselves in bones, like Rattleshirt . All wore fur and leather. There were spearwives with them, long hair streaming . Jon could not look at them without remembering Ygritte: the gleam of fire in her hair, the look on her face when she ' d disrobed for him in the grotto, the sound of her voice . " You know nothing, Jon Snow, " she ' d told him a hundred times. It is as true now as it was then . " You might have sent the women first, " he said to Tormund . " The mothers and the maids . " The wildling gave him a shrewd look . Aye, I might have . And you crows might decide to close that gate . A few fighters on t ' other side, well, that way the gate stays open, don ' t it? He grinned . I bought your bloody horse, Jon Snow . Don ' t mean that we can ' t count his teeth . Now don ' t you go thinking me and mine don ' t trust you . We trust you just as much as you trust us . He snorted . You wanted warriors, didn ' t you? Well, there they are . Every one worth six o ' your black crows. Jon had to smile [BOS] So long as they save those weapons for our common foe, I am content . [EOS]  " Gave you my word on it, didn ' t I? The word of Tormund Giantsbane . Strong as iron, ' tis . " He turned and spat. Amongst the stream of warriors were the fathers of many of Jon ' s hostages . Some stared with cold dead eyes as they went by, fingering their sword hilts . Others smiled at him like long-lost kin, though a few of those smiles discomfited Jon Snow more than any glare . None knelt, but many gave him their oaths . What Tormund swore, I swear, declared black-haired Brogg, a man of few words . Soren Shieldbreaker bowed his head an inch and growled, Soren ' s axe is yours, Jon Snow, if ever you have need of such . Red-bearded Gerrick Kingsblood brought three daughters . They will make fine wives, and give their husbands strong sons of royal blood, he boasted . Like their father, they are descended from Raymun Redbeard, who was King-Beyond-the-Wall. Blood meant little and less amongst the free folk, Jon knew . Ygritte had taught him that . Gerrick ' s daughters shared her same flame-red hair, though hers had been a tangle of curls and theirs hung long and straight . Kissed by fire . " Three princesses, each lovelier than the last, " he told their father . " I will see that they are presented to the queen . " Selyse Baratheon would take to these three better than she had to Val, he suspected; they were younger and considerably more cowed . Sweet enough to look at them, though their father seems a fool. Howd Wanderer swore his oath upon his sword, as nicked and pitted a piece of iron as Jon had ever seen . Devyn Sealskinner presented him with a sealskin hat, Harle the Huntsman with a bear-claw necklace . The warrior witch Morna removed her weirwood mask just long enough to kiss his gloved hand and swear to be his man or his woman, whichever he preferred . And on and on and on. As they passed, each warrior stripped off his treasures and tossed them into one of the carts that the stewards had placed before the gate . Amber pendants, golden torques, jeweled daggers, silver brooches set with gemstones, bracelets, rings, niello cups and golden goblets, warhorns and drinking horns, a green jade comb, a necklace of freshwater pearls … all yielded up and noted down by Bowen Marsh . One man surrendered a shirt of silver scales that had surely been made for some great lord . Another produced a broken sword with three sapphires in the hilt. And there were queerer things: a toy mammoth made of actual mammoth hair, an ivory phallus, a helm made from a unicorn ' s head, complete with horn . How much food such things would buy in the Free Cities, Jon Snow could not begin to say. After the riders came the men of the Frozen Shore . Jon watched a dozen of their big bone chariots roll past him one by one, clattering like Rattleshirt . Half still rolled as before; others had replaced their wheels with runners . They slid across the snowdrifts smoothly, where the wheeled chariots were foundering and sinking. The dogs that drew the chariots were fearsome beasts, as big as direwolves . Their women were clad in sealskins, some with infants at their breasts . Older children shuffled along behind their mothers and looked up at Jon with eyes as dark and hard as the stones they clutched . Some of the men wore antlers on their hats, and some wore walrus tusks . The two sorts did not love each other, he soon gathered . A few thin reindeer brought up the rear, with the great dogs snapping at the heels of stragglers. Be wary o ' that lot, Jon Snow, Tormund warned him . A savage folk . The men are bad, the women worse . He took a skin off his saddle and offered it up to Jon . Here . This will make them seem less fearsome, might be . And warm you for the night . No, go on, it ' s yours to keep . Drink deep. Within was a mead so potent it made Jon ' s eyes water and sent tendrils of fire snaking through his chest . He drank deep . " You ' re a good man, Tormund Giantsbabe . For a wildling . " " Better than most, might be . Not so good as some . " On and on the wildlings came, as the sun crept across the bright blue sky . Just before midday, the movement stopped when an oxcart became jammed at a turn inside the tunnel . Jon Snow went to have a look for himself . The cart was now wedged solid . The men behind were threatening to hack it apart and butcher the ox where he stood, whilst the driver and his kin swore to kill them if they tried . With the help of Tormund and his son Toregg, Jon managed to keep the wildlings from coming to blood, but it took the best part of an hour before the way was opened again. " You need a bigger gate, " Tormund complained to Jon with a sour look up at the sky, where a few clouds had blown in . " Too bloody slow this way . Like sucking the Milkwater through a reed . Har . Would that I had the Horn of Joramun . I ' d give it a nice toot and we ' d climb through the rubble . " " Melisandre burned the Horn of Joramun . " " Did she? " Tormund slapped his thigh and hooted . " She burned that fine big horn, aye . A bloody sin, I call it . A thousand years old, that was . We found it in a giant ' s grave, and no man o ' us had ever seen a horn so big . That must have been why Mance got the notion to tell you it were Joramun ' s . He wanted you crows to think he had it in his power to blow your bloody Wall down about your knees . But we never found the true horn, not for all our digging . If we had, every kneeler in your Seven Kingdoms would have chunks o ' ice to cool his wine all summer . " Jon turned in his saddle, frowning . And Joramun blew the Horn of Winter and woke giants from the earth . That huge horn with its bands of old gold, incised with ancient runes … had Mance Rayder lied to him, or was Tormund lying now? If Mance ' s horn was just a feint, where is the true horn? By afternoon the sun had gone, and the day turned grey and gusty . " A snow sky, " Tormund announced grimly. Others had seen the same omen in those flat white clouds . It seemed to spur them on to haste . Tempers began to fray . One man was stabbed when he tried to slip in ahead of others who had been hours in the column . Toregg wrenched the knife away from his attacker, dragged both men from the press, and sent them back to the wildling camp to start again. Jon said, as they watched four old women pull a cartful of children toward the gate, [BOS] Tormund, tell me of our foe . I would know all there is to know of the Others . [EOS]  The wildling rubbed his mouth . Not here, he mumbled, not this side o ' your Wall . The old man glanced uneasily toward the trees in their white mantles . They ' re never far, you know . They won ' t come out by day, not when that old sun ' s shining, but don ' t think that means they went away . Shadows never go away . Might be you don ' t see them, but they ' re always clinging to your heels. " Did they trouble you on your way south? " They never came in force, if that ' s your meaning, but they were with us all the same, nibbling at our edges . We lost more outriders than I care to think about, and it was worth your life to fall behind or wander off . Every nightfall we ' d ring our camps with fire . They don ' t like fire much, and no mistake . When the snows came, though … snow and sleet and freezing rain, it ' s bloody hard to find dry wood or get your kindling lit, and the cold … some nights our fires just seemed to shrivel up and die . Nights like that, you always find some dead come the morning . ‘ Less they find you first . The night that Torwynd … my boy, he … ' Tormund turned his face away. " I know, " said Jon Snow. Tormund turned back . " You know nothing . You killed a dead man, aye, I heard . Mance killed a hundred . A man can fight the dead, but when their masters come, when the white mists rise up … how do you fight a mist, crow? Shadows with teeth … air so cold it hurts to breathe, like a knife inside your chest … you do not know, you cannot know … can your sword cut cold? " We will see, Jon thought, remembering the things that Sam had told him, the things he ' d found in his old books . Longclaw had been forged in the fires of old Valyria, forged in dragonflame and set with spells . Dragonsteel, Sam called it . Stronger than any common steel, lighter, harder, sharper … But words in a book were one thing . The true test came in battle. Jon said [BOS] You are not wrong, I do not know . And if the gods are good, I never will . [EOS]  The gods are seldom good, Jon Snow . Tormund nodded toward the sky . The clouds roll in . Already it grows darker, colder . Your Wall no longer weeps . Look . He turned and called out to his son Toregg . Ride back to the camp and get them moving . The sick ones and the weak ones, the slugabeds and cravens, get them on their bloody feet . Set their bloody tents afire if you must . The gate must close at nightfall . Any man not through the Wall by then had best pray the Others get to him afore I do . You hear? " I hear . " Toregg put his heels into his horse and galloped back down the column. On and on the wildlings came . The day grew darker, just as Tormund said . Clouds covered the sky from horizon to horizon, and warmth fled . There was more shoving at the gate, as men and goats and bullocks jostled each other out of the way . It is more than impatience, Jon realized . They are afraid . Warriors, spearwives, raiders, they are frightened of those woods, of shadows moving through the trees . They want to put the Wall between them before the night descends. A snowflake danced upon the air . Then another . Dance with me, Jon Snow, he thought . You ' ll dance with me anon. On and on and on the wildlings came . Some were moving faster now, hastening across the battleground . Others—the old, the young, the feeble—could scarce move at all . This morning the field had been covered with a thick blanket of old snow, its white crust shining in the sun . Now the field was brown and black and slimy . The passage of the free folk had turned the ground to mud and muck: wooden wheels and horses ' hooves, runners of bone and horn and iron, pig trotters, heavy boots, the cloven feet of cows and bullocks, the bare black feet of the Hornfoot folk, all had left their marks . The soft footing slowed the column even more . " You need a bigger gate, " Tormund complained again. By late afternoon the snow was falling steadily, but the river of wildlings had dwindled to a stream . Columns of smoke rose from the trees where their camp had been . " Toregg, " Tormund explained . " Burning the dead . Always some who go to sleep and don ' t wake up . You find them in their tents, them as have tents, curled up and froze . Toregg knows what to do . " The stream was no more than a trickle by the time Toregg emerged from the wood . With him rode a dozen mounted warriors armed with spears and swords . " My rear guard, " Tormund said, with a gap-toothed smile . " You crows have rangers . So do we . Them I left in camp in case we were attacked before we all got out . " " Your best men . " " Or my worst . Every man o ' them has killed a crow . " Amongst the riders came one man afoot, with some big beast trotting at his heels . A boar, Jon saw . A monstrous boar . Twice the size of Ghost, the creature was covered with coarse black hair, with tusks as long as a man ' s arm . Jon had never seen a boar so huge or ugly . The man beside him was no beauty either; hulking, black-browed, he had a flat nose, heavy jowls dark with stubble, small black close-set eyes. " Borroq . " Tormund turned his head and spat. " A skinchanger . " It was not a question . Somehow he knew. Ghost turned his head . The falling snow had masked the boar ' s scent, but now the white wolf had the smell . He padded out in front of Jon, his teeth bared in a silent snarl. Jon snapped [BOS] No! Ghost, down . Stay . Stay! [EOS]  Boars and wolves, said Tormund . Best keep that beast o ' yours locked up tonight . I ' ll see that Borroq does the same with his pig . He glanced up at the darkening sky . Them ' s the last, and none too soon . It ' s going to snow all night, I feel it . Time I had a look at what ' s on t ' other side of all that ice. Jon told him [BOS] You go ahead, I mean to be the last one through the ice . I will join you at the feast . [EOS]  " Feast? Har! Now that ' s a word I like to hear . " The wildling turned his garron toward the Wall and slapped her on the rump . Toregg and the riders followed, dismounting by the gate to lead their horses through . Bowen Marsh stayed long enough to supervise as his stewards pulled the last carts into the tunnel . Only Jon Snow and his guards were left. The skinchanger stopped ten yards away . His monster pawed at the mud, snuffling . A light powdering of snow covered the boar ' s humped black back . He gave a snort and lowered his head, and for half a heartbeat Jon thought he was about to charge . To either side of him, his men lowered their spears. " Brother, " Borroq said. " You ' d best go on . We are about to close the gate . " " You do that, " Borroq said . " You close it good and tight . They ' re coming, crow . " He smiled as ugly a smile as Jon had ever seen and made his way to the gate . The boar stalked after him . The falling snow covered up their tracks behind them. " That ' s done, then, " Rory said when they were gone. No, thought Jon Snow, it has only just begun. Bowen Marsh was waiting for him south of the Wall, with a tablet full of numbers . " Three thousand one hundred and nineteen wildlings passed through the gate today, " the Lord Steward told him . " Sixty of your hostages were sent off to Eastwatch and the Shadow Tower after they ' d been fed . Edd Tollett took six wagons of women back to Long Barrow . The rest remain with us . " Jon promised him [BOS] Not for long, Tormund means to lead his own folk to Oakenshield within a day or two . The rest will follow, as soon as we sort where to put them . [EOS]  " As you say, Lord Snow . " The words were stiff . The tone suggested that Bowen Marsh knew where he would put them. The castle Jon returned to was far different from the one he ' d left that morning . For as long as he had known it, Castle Black had been a place of silence and shadows, where a meagre company of men in black moved like ghosts amongst the ruins of a fortress that had once housed ten times their numbers . All that had changed . Lights now shone through windows where Jon Snow had never seen lights shine before . Strange voices echoed down the yards, and free folk were coming and going along icy paths that had only known the black boots of crows for years . Outside the old Flint Barracks, he came across a dozen men pelting one another with snow . Playing, Jon thought in astonishment, grown men playing like children, throwing snowballs the way Bran and Arya once did, and Robb and me before them. Donal Noye ' s old armory was still dark and silent, however, and Jon ' s rooms back of the cold forge were darker still . But he had no sooner taken off his cloak than Dannel poked his head through the door to announce that Clydas had brought a message. " Send him in . " Jon lit a taper from an ember in his brazier and three candles from the taper. Clydas entered pink and blinking, the parchment clutched in one soft hand . " Beg pardon, Lord Commander . I know you must be weary, but I thought you would want to see this at once . " " You did well . " Jon read: At Hardhome, with six ships . Wild seas . Blackbird lost with all hands, two Lyseni ships driven aground on Skane, Talon taking water . Very bad here . Wildlings eating their own dead . Dead things in the woods . Braavosi captains will only take women, children on their ships . Witch women call us slavers . Attempt to take Storm Crow defeated, six crew dead, many wildlings . Eight ravens left . Dead things in the water . Send help by land, seas wracked by storms . From Talon, by hand of Maester Harmune. Cotter Pyke had made his angry mark below. " Is it grievous, my lord? " asked Clydas. " Grievous enough . " Dead things in the wood . Dead things in the water . Six ships left, of the eleven that set sail . Jon Snow rolled up the parchment, frowning . Night falls, he thought, and now my war begins. Let them die, said Queen Selyse. It was the answer that Jon Snow had expected . This queen never fails to disappoint . Somehow that did not soften the blow . " Your Grace, " he persisted stubbornly, " they are starving at Hardhome by the thousands . Many are women— " " —and children, yes . Very sad . " The queen pulled her daughter closer to her and kissed her cheek . The cheek unmarred by greyscale, Jon did not fail to note . " We are sorry for the little ones, of course, but we must be sensible . We have no food for them, and they are too young to help the king my husband in his wars . Better that they be reborn into the light . " That was just a softer way of saying let them die. The chamber was crowded . Princess Shireen stood beside her mother ' s seat, with Patchface cross-legged at her feet . Behind the queen loomed Ser Axell Florent . Melisandre of Asshai stood closer to the fire, the ruby at her throat pulsing with every breath she took . The red woman too had her attendants—the squire Devan Seaworth and two of the guardsmen the king had left her. Queen Selyse ' s protectors stood along the walls, shining knights all in a row: Ser Malegorn, Ser Benethon, Ser Narbert, Ser Patrek, Ser Dorden, Ser Brus . With so many bloodthirsty wildlings infesting Castle Black, Selyse kept her sworn shields about her night and day . Tormund Giantsbane had roared to hear it . " Afraid of being carried off, is she? I hope you never said how big me member is, Jon Snow, that ' d frighten any woman . I always wanted me one with a mustache . " Then he laughed and laughed. He would not be laughing now. Jon had wasted enough time here [BOS] I ' m sorry to have troubled Your Grace . The Night ' s Watch will attend to this matter . [EOS]  The queen ' s nostrils flared . " You still mean to ride to Hardhome . I see it on your face . Let them die, I said, yet you will persist in this mad folly . Do not deny it . " " I must do as I think best . With respect, Your Grace, the Wall is mine, and so is this decision . " " It is, " Selyse allowed, " and you will answer for it when the king returns . And for other decisions you have made, I fear . But I see that you are deaf to sense . Do what you must . " Up spoke Ser Malegorn . " Lord Snow, who will lead this ranging? " " Are you offering yourself, ser? " " Do I look so foolish? " Patchface jumped up . " I will lead it! " His bells rang merrily . " We will march into the sea and out again . Under the waves we will ride seahorses, and mermaids will blow seashells to announce our coming, oh, oh, oh . " They all laughed . Even Queen Selyse allowed herself a thin smile . Jon was less amused . " I will not ask my men to do what I would not do myself . I mean to lead the ranging . " How bold of you, said the queen . We approve . Afterward some bard will make a stirring song about you, no doubt, and we shall have a more prudent lord commander . She took a sip of wine . Let us speak of other matters . Axell, bring in the wildling king, if you would be so good. At once, Your Grace . Ser Axell went through a door and returned a moment later with Gerrick Kingsblood . Gerrick of House Redbeard, he announced, King of the Wildlings. Gerrick Kingsblood was a tall man, long of leg and broad of shoulder . The queen had dressed him in some of the king ' s old clothes, it appeared . Scrubbed and groomed, clad in green velvets and an ermine half-cape, with his long red hair freshly washed and his fiery beard shaped and trimmed, the wildling looked every inch a southron lord . He could walk into the throne room at King ' s Landing, and no one would blink an eye, Jon thought. " Gerrick is the true and rightful king of the wildlings, " the queen said, " descended in an unbroken male line from their great king Raymun Redbeard, whereas the usurper Mance Rayder was born of some common woman and fathered by one of your black brothers . " No, Jon might have said, Gerrick is descended from a younger brother of Raymun Redbeard . To the free folk that counted about as much as being descended from Raymun Redbeard ' s horse . They know nothing, Ygritte . And worse, they will not learn. " Gerrick has graciously agreed to give the hand of his eldest daughter to my beloved Axell, to be united by the Lord of Light in holy wedlock, " Queen Selyse said . " His other girls shall wed at the same time—the second daughter with Ser Brus Buckler and the youngest with Ser Malegorn of Redpool . " Jon inclined his head to the knights in question [BOS] Sers . May you find happiness with your betrothed . [EOS]  " Under the sea, men marry fishes . " Patchface did a little dance step, jingling his bells . " They do, they do, they do . " Queen Selyse sniffed again . " Four marriages can be made as simply as three . It is past time that this woman Val was settled, Lord Snow . I have decided that she shall wed my good and leal knight, Ser Patrek of King ' s Mountain . " " Has Val been told, Your Grace? " asked Jon . " Amongst the free folk, when a man desires a woman, he steals her, and thus proves his strength, his cunning, and his courage . The suitor risks a savage beating if he is caught by the woman ' s kin, and worse than that if she herself finds him unworthy . " " A savage custom, " Axell Florent said. Ser Patrek only chuckled . " No man has ever had cause to question my courage . No woman ever will . " Queen Selyse pursed her lips . " Lord Snow, as Lady Val is a stranger to our ways, please send her to me, that I might instruct her in the duties of a noble lady toward her lord husband . " That will go splendidly, I know . Jon wondered if the queen would be so eager to see Val married to one of her own knights if she knew Val ' s feelings about Princess Shireen . " As you wish, " he said, " though if I might speak freely— " " No, I think not . You may take your leave of us . " Jon Snow bent his knee, bowed his head, withdrew. He took the steps two at a time, nodding to the queen ' s guards as he descended . Her Grace had posted men on every landing to keep her safe from murderous wildlings . Halfway down, a voice called out from above him . " Jon Snow . " Jon turned [BOS] Lady Melisandre . [EOS]  " We must speak . " " Must we? " I think not . " My lady, I have duties . " " It is those duties I would speak of . " She made her way down, the hem of her scarlet skirts swishing over the steps . It almost seemed as if she floated . " Where is your direwolf? " " Asleep in my chambers . Her Grace does not allow Ghost in her presence . She claims he scares the princess . And so long as Borroq and his boar are about, I dare not let him loose . " The skinchanger was to accompany Soren Shieldbreaker to Stonedoor once the wayns carrying the Sealskinner ' s clan to Greenguard returned . Until such time, Borroq had taken up residence in one of the ancient tombs beside the castle lichyard . The company of men long dead seemed to suit him better than that of the living, and his boar seemed happy rooting amongst the graves, well away from other animals . " That thing is the size of a bull, with tusks as long as swords . Ghost would go after him if he were loose, and one or both of them would not survive the meeting . " " Borroq is the least of your concerns . This ranging … " " A word from you might have swayed the queen . " " Selyse has the right of this, Lord Snow . Let them die . You cannot save them . Your ships are lost— " " Six remain . More than half the fleet . " " Your ships are lost . All of them . Not a man shall return . I have seen that in my fires . " " Your fires have been known to lie . " " I have made mistakes, I have admitted as much, but— " " A grey girl on a dying horse . Daggers in the dark . A promised prince, born in smoke and salt . It seems to me that you make nothing but mistakes, my lady . Where is Stannis? What of Rattleshirt and his spearwives? Where is my sister? " " All your questions shall be answered . Look to the skies, Lord Snow . And when you have your answers, send to me . Winter is almost upon us now . I am your only hope . " Jon turned and left her [BOS] A fool ' s hope . [EOS]  Leathers was prowling the yard outside . " Toregg has returned, " he reported when Jon emerged . " His father ' s settled his people at Oakenshield and will be back this afternoon with eighty fighting men . What did the bearded queen have to say? " " Her Grace can provide no help . " " Too busy plucking out her chin hairs, is she? " Leathers spat . " Makes no matter . Tormund ' s men and ours will be enough . " Enough to get us there, perhaps . It was the journey back that concerned Jon Snow . Coming home, they would be slowed by thousands of free folk, many sick and starved . A river of humanity moving slower than a river of ice . That would leave them vulnerable . Dead things in the woods . Dead things in the water . How many men are enough? he asked Leathers . A hundred? Two hundred? Five hundred? A thousand? Should I take more men, or fewer? A smaller ranging would reach Hardhome sooner … but what good were swords without food? Mother Mole and her people were already at the point of eating their own dead . To feed them, he would need to bring carts and wagons, and draft animals to haul them—horses, oxen, dogs . Instead of flying through the wood, they would be condemned to crawl . There is still much to decide . Spread the word . I want all the leading men in the Shieldhall when the evening watch begins . Tormund should be back by then . Where can I find Toregg? " With the little monster, like as not . He ' s taken a liking to one o ' them milkmaids, I hear . " He has taken a liking to Val . Her sister was a queen, why not her? Tormund had once thought to make himself the King-Beyond-the-Wall, before Mance had bested him . Toregg the Tall might well be dreaming the same dream . Better him than Gerrick Kingsblood . Let them be, said Jon . I can speak with Toregg later . He glanced up past the King ' s Tower . The Wall was a dull white, the sky above it whiter . A snow sky . Just pray we do not get another storm. Outside the armory, Mully and the Flea stood shivering at guard . Jon asked [BOS] Shouldn ' t you be inside, out of this wind? [EOS]  " That ' d be sweet, m ' lord, " said Fulk the Flea, " but your wolf ' s in no mood for company today . " Mully agreed . " He tried to take a bite o ' me, he did . " " Ghost? " Jon was shocked. " Unless your lordship has some other white wolf, aye . I never seen him like this, m ' lord . All wild-like, I mean . " He was not wrong, as Jon discovered for himself when he slipped inside the doors . The big white direwolf would not lie still . He paced from one end of the armory to the other, past the cold forge and back again . Jon called [BOS] Easy, Ghost, Down . Sit, Ghost . Down . [EOS] Yet when he made to touch him, the wolf bristled and bared his teeth . It ' s that bloody boar . Even in here, Ghost can smell his stink. Mormont ' s raven seemed agitated too . Snow, the bird kept screaming . Snow, snow, snow . Jon shooed him off, had Satin start a fire, then sent him out after Bowen Marsh and Othell Yarwyck . Bring a flagon of mulled wine as well. " Three cups, m ' lord? " " Six . Mully and the Flea look in need of something warm . So will you . " When Satin left, Jon seated himself and had another look at the maps of the lands north of the Wall . The fastest way to Hardhome was along the coast … from Eastwatch . The woods were thinner near the sea, the terrain mostly flatlands, rolling hills, and salt marshes . And when the autumn storms came howling, the coast got sleet and hail and freezing rain rather than snow . The giants are at Eastwatch, and Leathers says that some will help . From Castle Black the way was more difficult, right through the heart of the haunted forest . If the snow is this deep at the Wall, how much worse up there? Marsh entered snuffling, Yarwyck dour . " Another storm, " the First Builder announced . " How are we to work in this? I need more builders . " Jon said [BOS] Use the free folk, [EOS]  Yarwyck shook his head . " More trouble than they ' re worth, that lot . Sloppy, careless, lazy … some good woodworkers here and there, I ' ll not deny it, but hardly a mason amongst them, and nary a smith . Strong backs, might be, but they won ' t do as they are told . And us with all these ruins to turn back into forts . Can ' t be done, my lord . I tell you true . It can ' t be done . " " It will be done, " said Jon, " or they will live in ruins . " A lord needed men about him he could rely upon for honest counsel . Marsh and Yarwyck were no lickspittles, and that was to the good … but they were seldom any help either . More and more, he found he knew what they would say before he asked them. Especially when it concerned the free folk, where their disapproval went bone deep . When Jon settled Stonedoor on Soren Shieldbreaker, Yarwyck complained that it was too isolated . How could they know what mischief Soren might get up to, off in those hills? When he conferred Oakenshield on Tormund Giantsbane and Queensgate on Morna White Mask, Marsh pointed out that Castle Black would now have foes on either side who could easily cut them off from the rest of the Wall . As for Borroq, Othell Yarwyck claimed the woods north of Stonedoor were full of wild boars . Who was to say the skinchanger would not make his own pig army? Hoarfrost Hill and Rimegate still lacked garrisons, so Jon had asked their views on which of the remaining wildling chiefs and war lords might be best suited to hold them . " We have Brogg, Gavin the Trader, the Great Walrus … Howd Wanderer walks alone, Tormund says, but there ' s still Harle the Huntsman, Harle the Handsome, Blind Doss … Ygon Oldfather commands a following, but most are his owns sons and grandsons . He has eighteen wives, half of them stolen on raids . Which of these … " " None, " Bowen Marsh had said . " I know all these men by their deeds . We should be fitting them for nooses, not giving them our castles . " " Aye, " Othell Yarwyck had agreed . " Bad and worse and worst makes a beggar ' s choice . My lord had as well present us with a pack of wolves and ask which we ' d like to tear our throats out . " It was the same again with Hardhome . Satin poured whilst Jon told them of his audience with the queen . Marsh listened attentively, ignoring the mulled wine, whilst Yarwyck drank one cup and then another . But no sooner had Jon finished than the Lord Steward said, " Her Grace is wise . Let them die . " Jon sat back [BOS] Is that the only counsel you can offer, my lord? Tormund is bringing eighty men . How many should we send? Shall we call upon the giants? The spearwives at Long Barrow? If we have women with us, it may put Mother Mole ' s people at ease . [EOS]  " Send women, then . Send giants . Send suckling babes . Is that what my lord wishes to hear? " Bowen Marsh rubbed at the scar he had won at the Bridge of Skulls . " Send them all . The more we lose, the fewer mouths we ' ll have to feed . " Yarwyck was no more helpful . " If the wildlings at Hardhome need saving, let the wildlings here go save them . Tormund knows the way to Hardhome . To hear him talk, he can save them all himself with his huge member . " This was pointless, Jon thought . Pointless, fruitless, hopeless . " Thank you for your counsel, my lords . " Satin helped them back into their cloaks . As they walked through the armory, Ghost sniffed at them, his tail upraised and bristling . My brothers . The Night ' s Watch needed leaders with the wisdom of Maester Aemon, the learning of Samwell Tarly, the courage of Qhorin Halfhand, the stubborn strength of the Old Bear, the compassion of Donal Noye . What it had instead was them. The snow was falling heavily outside . " Wind ' s from the south, " Yarwyck observed . " It ' s blowing the snow right up against the Wall . See? " He was right . The switchback stair was buried almost to the first landing, Jon saw, and the wooden doors of the ice cells and storerooms had vanished behind a wall of white . " How many men do we have in ice cells? " he asked Bowen Marsh. " Four living men . Two dead ones . " The corpses . Jon had almost forgotten them . He had hoped to learn something from the bodies they ' d brought back from the weirwood grove, but the dead men had stubbornly remained dead . " We need to dig those cells out . " " Ten stewards and ten spades should do it, " said Marsh. " Use Wun Wun too . " " As you command . " Ten stewards and one giant made short work of the drifts, but even when the doors were clear again, Jon was not satisfied . " Those cells will be buried again by morning . We ' d best move the prisoners before they smother . " " Karstark too, m ' lord? " asked Fulk the Flea . " Can ' t we just leave that one shivering till spring? " " Would that we could . " Cregan Karstark had taken to howling in the night of late, and throwing frozen feces at whoever came to feed him . That had not made him beloved of his guards . " Take him to the Lord Commander ' s Tower . The undervault should hold him . " Though partly collapsed, the Old Bear ' s former seat would be warmer than the ice cells . Its subcellars were largely intact. Cregan kicked at the guards when they came through the door, twisted and shoved when they grabbed him, even tried to bite them . But the cold had weakened him, and Jon ' s men were bigger, younger, and stronger . They hauled him out, still struggling, and dragged him through thigh-high snow to his new home. " What would the lord commander like us to do with his corpses? " asked Marsh when the living men had been moved. " Leave them . " If the storm entombed them, well and good . He would need to burn them eventually, no doubt, but for the nonce they were bound with iron chains inside their cells . That, and being dead, should suffice to hold them harmless. Tormund Giantsbane timed his arrival perfectly, thundering up with his warriors when all the shoveling was done . Only fifty seemed to have turned up, not the eighty Toregg promised Leathers, but Tormund was not called Tall-Talker for naught . The wildling arrived red-faced, shouting for a horn of ale and something hot to eat . He had ice in his beard and more crusting his mustache. Someone had already told the Thunderfist about Gerrick Kingsblood and his new style . " King o ' the Wildlings? " Tormund roared . " Har! King o ' My Hairy Butt Crack, more like . " Jon said [BOS] He has a regal look to him, [EOS]  He has a little red cock to go with all that red hair, that ' s what he has . Raymund Redbeard and his sons died at Long Lake, thanks to your bloody Starks and the Drunken Giant . Not the little brother . Ever wonder why they called him the Red Raven? Tormund ' s mouth split in a gap-toothed grin . First to fly the battle, he was . ' Twas a song about it, after . The singer had to find a rhyme for craven, so … He wiped his nose . If your queen ' s knights want those girls o ' his, they ' re welcome to them. " Girls, " squawked Mormont ' s raven . " Girls, girls . " That set Tormund to laughing all over again . " Now there ' s a bird with sense . How much do you want for him, Snow? I gave you a son, the least you could do is give me the bloody bird . " " I would, " said Jon, " but like as not you ' d eat him . " Tormund roared at that as well . " Eat, " the raven said darkly, flapping its black wings . " Corn? Corn? Corn? " " We need to talk about the ranging, " said Jon . " I want us to be of one mind at the Shieldhall, we must— " He broke off when Mully poked his nose inside the door, grim-faced, to announce that Clydas had brought a letter. " Tell him to leave it with you . I will read it later . " " As you say, m ' lord, only … Clydas don ' t look his proper self … he ' s more white than pink, if you get my meaning … and he ' s shaking . " " Dark wings, dark words, " muttered Tormund . " Isn ' t that what you kneelers say? " Jon told him [BOS] We say, Bleed a cold but feast a fever too, We say, Never drink with Dornishmen when the moon is full . We say a lot of things . [EOS]  Mully added his two groats . " My old grandmother always used to say, Summer friends will melt away like summer snows, but winter friends are friends forever . " " I think that ' s sufficient wisdom for the moment, " said Jon Snow . " Show Clydas in if you would be so good . " Mully had not been wrong; the old steward was trembling, his face as pale as the snows outside . " I am being foolish, Lord Commander, but … this letter frightens me . See here? " Bastard, was the only word written outside the scroll . No Lord Snow or Jon Snow or Lord Commander . Simply Bastard . And the letter was sealed with a smear of hard pink wax . Jon said . You were right to be afraid . He cracked the seal, flattened the parchment, and read [BOS] You were right to come at once, [EOS]  Your false king is dead, bastard . He and all his host were smashed in seven days of battle . I have his magic sword . Tell his red whore. Your false king ' s friends are dead . Their heads upon the walls of Winterfell . Come see them, bastard . Your false king lied, and so did you . You told the world you burned the King-Beyond-the-Wall . Instead you sent him to Winterfell to steal my bride from me. I will have my bride back . If you want Mance Rayder back, come and get him . I have him in a cage for all the north to see, proof of your lies . The cage is cold, but I have made him a warm cloak from the skins of the six whores who came with him to Winterfell. I want my bride back . I want the false king ' s queen . I want his daughter and his red witch . I want his wildling princess . I want his little prince, the wildling babe . And I want my Reek . Send them to me, bastard, and I will not trouble you or your black crows . Keep them from me, and I will cut out your bastard ' s heart and eat it. " Snow? " said Tormund Giantsbane . " You look like your father ' s bloody head just rolled out o ' that paper . " Jon Snow did not answer at once . " Mully, help Clydas back to his chambers . The night is dark, and the paths will be slippery with snow . Satin, go with them . " He handed Tormund Giantsbane the letter . " Here, see for yourself . " The wildling gave the letter a dubious look and handed it right back . " Feels nasty … but Tormund Thunderfist had better things to do than learn to make papers talk at him . They never have any good to say, now do they? " " Not often, " Jon Snow admitted . Dark wings, dark words . Perhaps there was more truth to those wise old sayings than he ' d known . " It was sent by Ramsay Snow . I ' ll read you what he wrote . " When he was done, Tormund whistled . " Har . That ' s buggered, and no mistake . What was that about Mance? Has him in a cage, does he? How, when hundreds saw your red witch burn the man? " That was Rattleshirt, Jon almost said . That was sorcery . A glamor, she called it . " Melisandre … look to the skies, she said . " He set the letter down . " A raven in a storm . She saw this coming . " When you have your answers, send to me. " Might be all a skin o ' lies . " Tormund scratched under his beard . " If I had me a nice goose quill and a pot o ' maester ' s ink, I could write down that me member was long and thick as me arm, wouldn ' t make it so . " " He has Lightbringer . He talks of heads upon the walls of Winterfell . He knows about the spearwives and their number . " He knows about Mance Rayder . " No . There is truth in there . " " I won ' t say you ' re wrong . What do you mean to do, crow? " Jon flexed the fingers of his sword hand . The Night ' s Watch takes no part . He closed his fist and opened it again . What you propose is nothing less than treason . He thought of Robb, with snowflakes melting in his hair . Kill the boy and let the man be born . He thought of Bran, clambering up a tower wall, agile as a monkey . Of Rickon ' s breathless laughter . Of Sansa, brushing out Lady ' s coat and singing to herself . You know nothing, Jon Snow . He thought of Arya, her hair as tangled as a bird ' s nest . I made him a warm cloak from the skins of the six whores who came with him to Winterfell … I want my bride back … I want my bride back … I want my bride back … " I think we had best change the plan, " Jon Snow said. They talked for the best part of two hours. Horse and Rory had replaced Fulk and Mully at the armory door with the change of watch . Jon told them, when the time came . Ghost would have followed as well, but as the wolf came padding after them, Jon grabbed him by the scruff of his neck and wrestled him back inside . Borroq might be amongst those gathering at the Shieldhall . The last thing he needed just now was his wolf savaging the skinchanger ' s boar [BOS] With me, [EOS]  The Shieldhall was one of the older parts of Castle Black, a long drafty feast hall of dark stone, its oaken rafters black with the smoke of centuries . Back when the Night ' s Watch had been much larger, its walls had been hung with rows of brightly colored wooden shields . Then as now, when a knight took the black, tradition decreed that he set aside his former arms and take up the plain black shield of the brotherhood . The shields thus discarded would hang in the Shieldhall. Hundreds of knights meant hundreds of shields . Hawks and eagles, dragons and griffins, suns and stags, wolves and wyverns, manticores, bulls, trees and flowers, harps, spears, crabs and krakens, red lions and golden lions and chequy lions, owls, lambs, maids and mermen, stallions, stars, buckets and buckles, flayed men and hanged men and burning men, axes, longswords, turtles, unicorns, bears, quills, spiders and snakes and scorpions, and a hundred other heraldic charges had adorned the Shieldhall walls, blazoned in more colors than any rainbow ever dreamed of. But when a knight died, his shield was taken down, that it might go with him to his pyre or his tomb, and over the years and centuries fewer and fewer knights had taken the black . A day came when it no longer made sense for the knights of Castle Black to dine apart . The Shieldhall was abandoned . In the last hundred years, it had been used only infrequently . As a dining hall, it left much to be desired—it was dark, dirty, drafty, and hard to heat in winter, its cellars infested with rats, its massive wooden rafters worm-eaten and festooned with cobwebs. But it was large and long enough to seat two hundred, and half again that many if they crowded close . When Jon and Tormund entered, a sound went through the hall, like wasps stirring in a nest . The wildlings outnumbered the crows by five to one, judging by how little black he saw . Fewer than a dozen shields remained, sad grey things with faded paint and long cracks in the wood . But fresh torches burned in the iron sconces along the walls, and Jon had ordered benches and tables brought in . Men with comfortable seats were more inclined to listen, Maester Aemon had once told him; standing men were more inclined to shout. At the top of the hall a sagging platform stood . Jon mounted it, with Tormund Giantsbane at his side, and raised his hands for quiet . The wasps only buzzed the louder . Then Tormund put his warhorn to his lips and blew a blast . The sound filled the hall, echoing off the rafters overhead . Silence fell. I summoned you to make plans for the relief of Hardhome, Jon Snow began . Thousands of the free folk are gathered there, trapped and starving, and we have had reports of dead things in the wood . To his left he saw Marsh and Yarwyck . Othell was surrounded by his builders, whilst Bowen had Wick Whittlestick, Left Hand Lew, and Alf of Runnymudd beside him . To his right, Soren Shieldbreaker sat with his arms crossed against his chest . Farther back, Jon saw Gavin the Trader and Harle the Handsome whispering together . Ygon Oldfather sat amongst his wives, Howd Wanderer alone . Borroq leaned against a wall in a dark corner . Mercifully, his boar was nowhere in evidence . The ships I sent to take off Mother Mole and her people have been wracked by storms . We must send what help we can by land or let them die . Two of Queen Selyse ' s knights had come as well, Jon saw . Ser Narbert and Ser Benethon stood near the door at the foot of the hall . But the rest of the queen ' s men were conspicuous in their absence . I had hoped to lead the ranging myself and bring back as many of the free folk as could survive the journey . A flash of red in the back of the hall caught Jon ' s eye . Lady Melisandre had arrived . But now I find I cannot go to Hardhome . The ranging will be led by Tormund Giantsbane, known to you all . I have promised him as many men as he requires. " And where will you be, crow? " Borroq thundered . " Hiding here in Castle Black with your white dog? " " No . I ride south . " Then Jon read them the letter Ramsay Snow had written. The Shieldhall went mad. Every man began to shout at once . They leapt to their feet, shaking fists . So much for the calming power of comfortable benches . Swords were brandished, axes smashed against shields . Jon Snow looked to Tormund . The Giantsbane sounded his horn once more, twice as long and twice as loud as the first time. The Night ' s Watch takes no part in the wars of the Seven Kingdoms, Jon reminded them when some semblance of quiet had returned . It is not for us to oppose the Bastard of Bolton, to avenge Stannis Baratheon, to defend his widow and his daughter . This creature who makes cloaks from the skins of women has sworn to cut my heart out, and I mean to make him answer for those words … but I will not ask my brothers to forswear their vows. Jon paused [BOS] The Night ' s Watch will make for Hardhome . I ride to Winterfell alone, unless … … is there any man here who will come stand with me? [EOS]  The roar was all he could have hoped for, the tumult so loud that the two old shields tumbled from the walls . Soren Shieldbreaker was on his feet, the Wanderer as well . Toregg the Tall, Brogg, Harle the Huntsman and Harle the Handsome both, Ygon Oldfather, Blind Doss, even the Great Walrus . I have my swords, thought Jon Snow, and we are coming for you, Bastard. Yarwyck and Marsh were slipping out, he saw, and all their men behind them . It made no matter . He did not need them now . He did not want them . No man can ever say I made my brothers break their vows . If this is oathbreaking, the crime is mine and mine alone . Then Tormund was pounding him on the back, all gap-toothed grin from ear to ear . " Well spoken, crow . Now bring out the mead! Make them yours and get them drunk, that ' s how it ' s done . We ' ll make a wildling o ' you yet, boy . Har! " Jon said, distracted . Melisandre was gone, he realized, and so were the queen ' s knights . I should have gone to Selyse first . She has the right to know her lord is dead [BOS] I will send for ale, You must excuse me . I ' ll leave you to get them drunk . [EOS]  " Har! A task I ' m well suited for, crow . On your way! " Horse and Rory fell in beside Jon as he left the Shieldhall . I should talk with Melisandre after I see the queen, he thought . If she could see a raven in a storm, she can find Ramsay Snow for me . Then he heard the shouting … and a roar so loud it seemed to shake the Wall . " That come from Hardin ' s Tower, m ' lord, " Horse reported . He might have said more, but the scream cut him off. Val, was Jon ' s first thought . But that was no woman ' s scream . That is a man in mortal agony . He broke into a run . Horse and Rory raced after him . " Is it wights? " asked Rory . Jon wondered . Could his corpses have escaped their chains? The screaming had stopped by the time they came to Hardin ' s Tower, but Wun Weg Wun Dar Wun was still roaring . The giant was dangling a bloody corpse by one leg, the same way Arya used to dangle her doll when she was small, swinging it like a morningstar when menaced by vegetables . Arya never tore her dolls to pieces, though . The dead man ' s sword arm was yards away, the snow beneath it turning red. Jon shouted [BOS] Let him go, Wun Wun, let him go . [EOS]  Wun Wun did not hear or did not understand . The giant was bleeding himself, with sword cuts on his belly and his arm . He swung the dead knight against the grey stone of the tower, again and again and again, until the man ' s head was red and pulpy as a summer melon . The knight ' s cloak flapped in the cold air . Of white wool it had been, bordered in cloth-of-silver and patterned with blue stars . Blood and bone were flying everywhere. Men poured from the surrounding keeps and towers . Northmen, free folk, queen ' s men … " Form a line, " Jon Snow commanded them . " Keep them back . Everyone, but especially the queen ' s men . " The dead man was Ser Patrek of King ' s Mountain; his head was largely gone, but his heraldry was as distinctive as his face . Jon did not want to risk Ser Malegorn or Ser Brus or any of the queen ' s other knights trying to avenge him. Wun Weg Wun Dar Wun howled again and gave Ser Patrek ' s other arm a twist and pull . It tore loose from his shoulder with a spray of bright red blood . Like a child pulling petals off a daisy, thought Jon . Leathers, talk to him, calm him . The Old Tongue, he understands the Old Tongue . Keep back, the rest of you . Put away your steel, we ' re scaring him . Couldn ' t they see the giant had been cut? Jon had to put an end to this or more men would die . They had no idea of Wun Wun ' s strength . A horn, I need a horn . He saw the glint of steel, turned toward it . No blades! he screamed . Wick, put that knife … … away, he meant to say . When Wick Whittlestick slashed at his throat, the word turned into a grunt . Jon twisted from the knife, just enough so it barely grazed his skin . He cut me . When he put his hand to the side of his neck, blood welled between his fingers . " Why? " " For the Watch . " Wick slashed at him again . This time Jon caught his wrist and bent his arm back until he dropped the dagger . The gangling steward backed away, his hands upraised as if to say, Not me, it was not me . Men were screaming . Jon reached for Longclaw, but his fingers had grown stiff and clumsy . Somehow he could not seem to get the sword free of its scabbard. Then Bowen Marsh stood there before him, tears running down his cheeks . " For the Watch . " He punched Jon in the belly . When he pulled his hand away, the dagger stayed where he had buried it. Jon fell to his knees . He found the dagger ' s hilt and wrenched it free . In the cold night air the wound was smoking [BOS] Ghost, [EOS] he whispered . Pain washed over him . Stick them with the pointy end . When the third dagger took him between the shoulder blades, he gave a grunt and fell face-first into the snow . He never felt the fourth knife . Only the cold …