Maester Aemon sniffed Jon ' s wound again . Then he put the bloody cloth back in the basin and said, Donal, the hot knife, if you please . I shall need you to hold him still.I will not scream, Jon told himself when he saw the blade glowing red hot . But he broke that vow as well . Donal Noye held him down, while Clydas helped guide the maester ' s hand . Jon did not move, except to pound his fist against the table, again and again and again . The pain was so huge he felt small and weak and helpless inside it, a child whimpering in the dark . Ygritte, he thought, when the stench of burning flesh was in his nose and his own shriek echoing in her ears . Ygritte, I had to . For half a heartbeat the agony started to ebb . But then the iron touched him once again, and he fainted.When his eyelids fluttered open, he was wrapped in thick wool and floating . He could not seem to move, but that did not matter . For a time he dreamed that Ygritte was with him, tending him with gentle hands . Finally he closed his eyes and slept.The next waking was not so gentle . The room was dark, but under the blankets the pain was back, a throbbing in his leg that turned into a hot knife at the least motion . Jon learned that the hard way when he tried to see if he still had a leg . Gasping, he swallowed a scream and made another fist.Jon? A candle appeared, and a well-remembered face was looking down on him, big ears and all . You shouldn ' t move.Jon reached up, and the other boy clasped his hand and gave it a squeeze . [BOS] Pyp? I thought you ' d gone . . . [EOS] . . . with the Old Pomegranate? No, he thinks I ' m too small and green . Grenn ' s here too.I ' m here too . Grenn stepped to the other side of the bed . I fell asleep.Jon ' s throat was dry . Water, he gasped . Grenn brought it, and held it to his lips . I saw the Fist, he said, after a long swallow . The blood, and the dead horses . . . Noye said a dozen made it back . . . who?Dywen did . Giant, Dolorous Edd, Sweet Donnel Hill, Ulmer, Left Hand Lew, Garth Greyfeather . Four or five more . Me.Grenn looked away . He killed one of the Others, Jon . I saw it . He stabbed him with that dragonglass knife you made him, and we started calling him Sam the Slayer . He hated that.Sam the Slayer . Jon could hardly imagine a less likely warrior than Sam Tarly . What happened to him?We left him . Grenn sounded miserable . I shook him and screamed at him, even slapped his face . Giant tried to drag him to his feet, but he was too heavy . Remember in training how he ' d curl up on the ground and lie there whimpering? At Craster ' s he wouldn ' t even whimper . Dirk and Ollo were tearing up the walls looking for food, Garth and Garth were fighting, some of the others were raping Craster ' s wives . Dolorous Edd figured Dirk ' s bunch would kill all the loyal men to keep us from telling what they ' d done, and they had us two to one . We left Sam with the Old Bear . He wouldn ' t move, Jon.You were his brother, he almost said . How could you leave him amongst wildlings and murderers?He might still be alive, said Pyp . He might surprise us all and come riding up tomorrow.With Mance Rayder ' s head, aye . Grenn was trying to sound cheerful, Jon could tell . Sam the Slayer!Jon tried to sit again . It was as much a mistake as the first time . He cried out, cursing.Grenn, go wake Maester Aemon, said Pyp . Tell him Jon needs more milk of the poppy.Yes, Jon thought . No, he said . The Magnar . . .We know, said Pyp . The sentries on the Wall have been told to keep one eye on the south, and Donal Noye dispatched some men to Weatherback Ridge to watch the kingsroad . Maester Aemon ' s sent birds to Eastwatch and the Shadow Tower too.Maester Aemon shuffled to the bedside, one hand on Grenn ' s shoulder . Jon, be gentle with yourself . It is good that you have woken, but you must give yourself time to heal . We drowned the wound with boiling wine, and closed you up with a poultice of nettle, mustard seed and moldy bread, but unless you rest . . .I can ' t. Jon fought through the pain to sit . Mance will be here soon . . . thousands of men, giants, mammoths . . . has word been sent to Winterfell? To the king? Sweat dripped off his brow . He closed his eyes a moment.Grenn gave Pyp a strange look . He doesn ' t know.Jon, said Maester Aemon, much and more happened while you were away, and little of it good . Balon Greyjoy has crowned himself again and sent his longships against the north . Kings sprout like weeds at every hand and we have sent appeals to all of them, yet none will come . They have more pressing uses for their swords, and we are far off and forgotten . And Winterfell . . . Jon, be strong . . . Winterfell is no more . . .Jon stared at Aemon ' s white eyes and wrinkled face . [BOS] No more? My brothers are at Winterfell . Bran and Rickon . . . [EOS] The maester touched his brow . I am so very sorry, Jon . Your brothers died at the command of Theon Greyjoy, after he took Winterfell in his father ' s name . When your father ' s bannermen threatened to retake it, he put the castle to the torch.Your brothers were avenged, Grenn said . Bolton ' s son killed all the ironmen, and it ' s said he ' s flaying Theon Greyjoy inch by inch for what he did.I ' m sorry, Jon . Pyp squeezed his shoulder . We are all.Jon had never liked Theon Greyjoy, but he had been their father ' s ward . Another spasm of pain twisted up his leg, and the next he knew he was flat on his back again . There ' s some mistake, he insisted . At Queenscrown I saw a direwolf, a grey direwolf . . . grey . . . it knew me . If Bran was dead, could some part of him live on in his wolf, as Orell lived within his eagle?Drink this . Grenn held a cup to his lips . Jon drank . His head was full of wolves and eagles, the sound of his brothers ' laughter . The faces above him began to blur and fade . They can ' t be dead . Theon would never do that . And Winterfell . . . grey granite, oak and iron, crows wheeling around the towers, steam rising off the hot pools in the godswood, the stone kings sitting on their thrones . . . how could Winterfell be gone?When the dreams took him, he found himself back home once more, splashing in the hot pools beneath a huge white weirwood that had his father ' s face . Ygritte was with him, laughing at him, shedding her skins till she was naked as her name day, trying to kiss him, but he couldn ' t, not with his father watching . He was the blood of Winterfell, a man of the Night ' s Watch . I will not father a bastard, he told her . I will not . I will not . You know nothing, Jon Snow, she whispered, her skin dissolving in the hot water, the flesh beneath sloughing off her bones until only skull and skeleton remained, and the pool bubbled thick and red.They woke to the smoke of Mole ' s Town burning.Atop the King ' s Tower, Jon Snow leaned on the padded crutch that Maester Aemon had given him and watched the grey plume rise . Styr had lost all hope of taking Castle Black unawares when Jon escaped him, yet even so, he need not have warned of his approach so bluntly . You may kill us, he reflected, but no one will be butchered in their beds . That much I did, at least.His leg still hurt like blazes when he put his weight on it . He ' d needed Clydas to help him don his fresh-washed blacks and lace up his boots that morning, and by the time they were done he ' d wanted to drown himself in the milk of the poppy . Instead he had settled for half a cup of dreamwine, a chew of willow bark, and the crutch . The beacon was burning on Weatherback Ridge, and the Night ' s Watch had need of every man.I can fight, he insisted when they tried to stop him.Your leg ' s healed, is it? Noye snorted . You won ' t mind me giving it a little kick, then?I ' d sooner you didn ' t . It ' s stiff, but I can hobble around well enough, and stand and fight if you have need of me.I have need of every man who knows which end of the spear to stab into the wildlings.The pointy end . Jon had told his little sister something like that once, he remembered.Noye rubbed the bristle on his chin . Might be you ' ll do . We ' ll put you on a tower with a longbow, but if you bloody well fall off don ' t come crying to me.He could see the kingsroad wending its way south through stony brown fields and over windswept hills . The Magnar would be coming up that road before the day was done, his Thenns marching behind him with axes and spears in their hands and their bronze-and-leather shields on their backs . Grigg the Goat, Quort, Big Boil, and the rest will be coming as well . And Ygritte . The wildlings had never been his friends, he had not allowed them to be his friends, but her . . .He could feel the throb of pain where her arrow had gone through the meat and muscle of his thigh . He remembered the old man ' s eyes too, and the black blood rushing from his throat as the storm cracked overhead . But he remembered the grotto best of all, the look of her naked in the torchlight, the taste of her mouth when it opened under his . Ygritte, stay away . Go south and raid, go hide in one of those roundtowers you liked so well . You ' ll find nothing here but death.Across the yard, one of the bowmen on the roof of the old Flint Barracks had unlaced his breeches and was pissing through a crenel . Mully, he knew from the man ' s greasy orange hair . Men in black cloaks were visible on other roofs and tower tops as well, though nine of every ten happened to be made of straw . The scarecrow sentinels, Donal Noye called them . Only we ' re the crows, Jon mused, and most of us were scared enough.Whatever you called them, the straw soldiers had been Maester Aemon ' s notion . They had more breeches and jerkins and tunics in the storerooms than they ' d had men to fill them, so why not stuff some with straw, drape a cloak around their shoulders, and set them to standing watches? Noye had placed them on every tower and in half the windows . Some were even clutching spears, or had crossbows cocked under their arms . The hope was that the Thenns would see them from afar and decide that Castle Black was too well defended to attack.Jon had six scarecrows sharing the roof of the King ' s Tower with him, along with two actual breathing brothers . Deaf Dick Follard sat in a crenel, methodically cleaning and oiling the mechanism of his crossbow to make sure the wheel turned smoothly, while the Oldtown boy wandered restlessly around the parapets, fussing with the clothes on straw men . Maybe he thinks they will fight better if they ' re posed just right . Or maybe this waiting is fraying his nerves the way it ' s fraying mine.The boy claimed to be eighteen, older than Jon, but he was green as summer grass for all that . Satin, they called him, even in the wool and mail and boiled leather of the Night ' s Watch; the name he ' d gotten in the brothel where he ' d been born and raised . He was pretty as a girl with his dark eyes, soft skin, and raven ' s ringlets . Half a year at Castle Black had toughened up his hands, however, and Noye said he was passable with a crossbow . Whether he had the courage to face what was coming, though . . .Jon used the crutch to limp across the tower top . The King ' s Tower was not the castle ' s tallest—the high, slim, crumbling Lance held that honor, though Othell Yarwyck had been heard to say it might topple any day . Nor was the King ' s Tower strongest—the Tower of Guards beside the kingsroad would be a tougher nut to crack . But it was tall enough, strong enough, and well placed beside the Wall, overlooking the gate and the foot of the wooden stair.The first time he had seen Castle Black with his own eyes, Jon had wondered why anyone would be so foolish as to build a castle without walls . How could it be defended?It can ' t, his uncle told him . That is the point . The Night ' s Watch is pledged to take no part in the quarrels of the realm . Yet over the centuries certain Lords Commander, more proud than wise, forgot their vows and near destroyed us all with their ambitions . Lord Commander Runcel Hightower tried to bequeathe the Watch to his bastard son . Lord Commander Rodrik Flint thought to make himself King-beyond-the-Wall . Tristan Mudd, Mad Marq Rankenfell, Robin Hill . . . did you know that six hundred years ago, the commanders at Snowgate and the Nightfort went to war against each other? And when the Lord Commander tried to stop them, they joined forces to murder him? The Stark in Winterfell had to take a hand . . . and both their heads . Which he did easily, because their strongholds were not defensible . The Night ' s Watch had nine hundred and ninety-six Lords Commander before Jeor Mormont, most of them men of courage and honor . . . but we have had cowards and fools as well, our tyrants and our madmen . We survive because the lords and kings of the Seven Kingdoms know that we pose no threat to them, no matter who should lead us . Our only foes are to the north, and to the north we have the Wall.Only now those foes have gotten past the Wall to come up from the south, Jon reflected, and the lords and kings of the Seven Kingdoms have forgotten us . We are caught between the hammer and the anvil . Without a wall Castle Black could not be held; Donal Noye knew that as well as any . The castle does them no good, the armorer told his little garrison . Kitchens, common hall, stables, even the towers . . . let them take it all . We ' ll empty the armory and move what stores we can to the top of the Wall, and make our stand around the gate.So Castle Black had a wall of sorts at last, a crescent-shaped barricade ten feet high made of stores; casks of nails and barrels of salt mutton, crates, bales of black broadcloth, stacked logs, sawn timbers, fire-hardened stakes, and sacks and sacks of grain . The crude rampart enclosed the two things most worth defending; the gate to the north, and the foot of the great wooden switchback stair that clawed and climbed its way up the face of the Wall like a drunken thunderbolt, supported by wooden beams as big as tree trunks driven deep into the ice.The last few moles were still making the long climb, Jon saw, urged on by his brothers . Grenn was carrying a little boy in his arms, while Pyp, two flights below, let an old man lean upon his shoulder . The oldest villagers still waited below for the cage to make its way back down to them . He saw a mother pulling along two children, one on either hand, as an older boy ran past her up the steps . Two hundred feet above them, Sky Blue Su and Lady Meliana (who was no lady, all her friends agreed) stood on a landing, looking south . They had a better view of the smoke than he did, no doubt . Jon wondered about the villagers who had chosen not to flee . There were always a few, too stubborn or too stupid or too brave to run, a few who preferred to fight or hide or bend the knee . Maybe the Thenns would spare them.The thing to do would be to take the attack to them, he thought . With fifty rangers well mounted, we could cut them apart on the road . They did not have fifty rangers, though, nor half as many horses . The garrison had not returned, and there was no way to know just where they were, or even whether the riders that Noye had sent out had reached them.We are the garrison, Jon told himself, and look at us . The brothers Bowen Marsh had left behind were old men, cripples, and green boys, just as Donal Noye had warned him . He could see some wrestling barrels up the steps, others on the barricade; stout old Kegs, as slow as ever, Spare Boot hopping along briskly on his carved wooden leg, half-mad Easy who fancied himself Florian the Fool reborn, Dornish Dilly, Red Alyn of the Rosewood, Young Henly (well past fifty), Old Henly (well past seventy), Hairy Hal, Spotted Pate of Maidenpool . A couple of them saw Jon looking down from atop the King ' s Tower and waved up at him . Others turned away . They still think me a turncloak . That was a bitter draft to drink, but Jon could not blame them . He was a bastard, after all . Everyone knew that bastards were wanton and treacherous by nature, having been born of lust and deceit . And he had made as many enemies as friends at Castle Black . . . Rast, for one . Jon had once threatened to have Ghost rip his throat out unless he stopped tormenting Samwell Tarly, and Rast did not forget things like that . He was raking dry leaves into piles under the stairs just now, but every so often he stopped long enough to give Jon a nasty look.No, Donal Noye roared at three of the Mole ' s Town men, down below . The pitch goes to the hoist, the oil up the steps, crossbow bolts to the fourth, fifth, and sixth landings, spears to first and second . Stack the lard under the stair, yes, there, behind the planks . The casks of meat are for the barricade . Now, you poxy plow pushers, NOW!He has a lord ' s voice, Jon thought . His father had always said that in battle a captain ' s lungs were as important as his sword arm . It does not matter how brave or brilliant a man is, if his commands cannot be heard, Lord Eddard told his sons, so Robb and he used to climb the towers of Winterfell to shout at each other across the yard . Donal Noye could have drowned out both of them . The moles all went in terror of him, and rightfully so, since he was always threatening to rip their heads off.Three-quarters of the village had taken Jon ' s warning to heart and come to Castle Black for refuge . Noye had decreed that every man still spry enough to hold a spear or swing an axe would help defend the barricade, else they could damn well go home and take their chances with the Thenns . He had emptied the armory to put good steel in their hands; big double-bladed axes, razor-sharp daggers, longswords, maces, spiked morningstars . Clad in studded leather jerkins and mail hauberks, with greaves for their legs and gorgets to keep their heads on their shoulders, a few of them even looked like soldiers . In a bad light . If you squint.Noye had put the women and children to work as well . Those too young to fight would carry water and tend the fires, the Mole ' s Town midwife would assist Clydas and Maester Aemon with any wounded, and Three-Finger Hobb suddenly had more spit boys, kettle stirrers, and onion choppers than he knew what to do with . Two of the whores had even offered to fight, and had shown enough skill with the crossbow to be given a place on the steps forty feet up.It ' s cold . Satin stood with his hands tucked into his armpits under his cloak . His cheeks were bright red.Jon made himself smile . [BOS] The Frostfangs are cold . This is a brisk autumn day . [EOS] I hope I never see the Frostfangs then . I knew a girl in Oldtown who liked to ice her wine . That ' s the best place for ice, I think . In wine . Satin glanced south, frowned . You think the scarecrow sentinels scared them off, my lord?We can hope . It was possible, Jon supposed . . . but more likely the wildlings had simply paused for a bit of rape and plunder in Mole ' s Town . Or maybe Styr was waiting for nightfall, to move up under cover of darkness.Midday came and went, with still no sign of Thenns on the kingsroad . Jon heard footsteps inside the tower, though, and Owen the Oaf popped up out of the trapdoor, red-faced from the climb . He had a basket of buns under one arm, a wheel of cheese under the other, a bag of onions dangling from one hand . Hobb said to feed you, in case you ' re stuck up here awhile.That, or for our last meal . Thank him for us, Owen.Dick Follard was deaf as a stone, but his nose worked well enough . The buns were still warm from the oven when he went digging in the basket and plucked one out . He found a crock of butter as well, and spread some with his dagger . Raisins, he announced happily . Nuts, too . His speech was thick, but easy enough to understand once you got used to it.You can have mine too, said Satin . I ' m not hungry.Jon told him . [BOS] Eat, There ' s no knowing when you ' ll have another chance . [EOS] He took two buns himself . The nuts were pine nuts, and besides the raisins there were bits of dried apple.Will the wildlings come today, Lord Snow? Owen asked.You ' ll know if they do, said Jon . Listen for the horns.Two . Two is for wildlings . Owen was tall, towheaded, and amiable, a tireless worker and surprisingly deft when it came to working wood and fixing catapults and the like, but as he ' d gladly tell you, his mother had dropped him on his head when he was a baby, and half his wits had leaked out through his ear.Jon asked him . [BOS] You remember where to go? [EOS] I ' m to go to the stairs, Donal Noye says . I ' m to go up to the third landing and shoot my crossbow down at the wildlings if they try to climb over the barrier . The third landing, one two three . His head bobbed up and down . If the wildlings attack, the king will come and help us, won ' t he? He ' s a mighty warrior, King Robert . He ' s sure to come . Maester Aemon sent him a bird.There was no use telling him that Robert Baratheon was dead . He would forget it, as he ' d forgotten it before . Jon agreed . That seemed to make Owen happy . [BOS] Maester Aemon sent him a bird, [EOS] Maester Aemon had sent a lot of birds . . . not to one king, but to four . Wildlings at the gate, the message ran . The realm in danger . Send all the help you can to Castle Black . Even as far as Oldtown and the Citadel the ravens flew, and to half a hundred mighty lords in their castles . The northern lords offered their best hope, so to them Aemon had sent two birds . To the Umbers and the Boltons, to Castle Cerwyn and Torrhen ' s Square, Karhold and Deepwood Motte, to Bear Island, Oldcastle, Widow ' s Watch, White Harbor, Barrowton, and the Rills, to the mountain fastnesses of the Liddles, the Burleys, the Norreys, the Harclays, and the Wulls, the black birds brought their plea . Wildlings at the gate . The north in danger . Come with all your strength.Well, ravens might have wings, but lords and kings do not . If help was coming, it would not come today.As morning turned to afternoon, the smoke of Mole ' s Town blew away and the southern sky was clear again . No clouds, thought Jon . That was good . Rain or snow could doom them all.Clydas and Maester Aemon rode the winch cage up to safety at the top of the Wall, and most of the Mole ' s Town wives as well . Men in black cloaks paced restlessly on the tower tops and shouted back and forth across the courtyards . Septon Cellador led the men on the barricade in a prayer, beseeching the Warrior to give them strength . Deaf Dick Follard curled up beneath his cloak and went to sleep . Satin walked a hundred leagues in circles, round and round the crenellations . The Wall wept and the sun crept across a hard blue sky . Near evenfall, Owen the Oaf returned with a loaf of black bread and a pail of Hobb ' s best mutton, cooked in a thick broth of ale and onions . Even Dick woke up for that . They ate every bit of it, using chunks of bread to wipe the bottom of the pail . By the time they were done the sun was low in the west, the shadows sharp and black throughout the castle . Jon told Satin, [BOS] Light the fire, and fill the kettle with oil . [EOS] He went downstairs himself to bar the door, to try and work some of the stiffness from his leg . That was a mistake, and Jon soon knew it, but he clutched the crutch and saw it through all the same . The door to the King ' s Tower was oak studded with iron . It might delay the Thenns, but it would not stop them if they wanted to come in . Jon slammed the bar down in its notches, paid a visit to the privy—it might well be his last chance—and hobbled back up to the roof, grimacing at the pain.The west had gone the color of a blood bruise, but the sky above was cobalt blue, deepening to purple, and the stars were coming out . Jon sat between two merlons with only a scarecrow for company and watched the Stallion gallop up the sky . Or was it the Horned Lord? He wondered where Ghost was now . He wondered about Ygritte as well, and told himself that way lay madness.They came in the night, of course . Like thieves, Jon thought . Like murderers.Satin pissed himself when the horns blew, but Jon pretended not to notice . Go shake Dick by the shoulder, he told the Oldtown boy, else he ' s liable to sleep through the fight.I ' m frightened . Satin ' s face was a ghastly white.So are they . Jon leaned his crutch up against a merlon and took up his longbow, bending the smooth thick Dornish yew to slip a bowstring through the notches . Don ' t waste a quarrel unless you know you have a good clean shot, he said when Satin returned from waking Dick . We have an ample supply up here, but ample doesn ' t mean inexhaustible . And step behind a merlon to reload, don ' t try and hide in back of a scarecrow . They ' re made of straw, an arrow will punch through them . He did not bother telling Dick Follard anything . Dick could read your lips if there was enough light and he gave a damn what you were saying, but he knew it all already.The three of them took up positions on three sides of the round tower . Jon hung a quiver from his belt and pulled an arrow . The shaft was black, the fletching grey . As he notched it to his string, he remembered something that Theon Greyjoy had once said after a hunt . The boar can keep his tusks and the bear his claws, he had declared, smiling that way he did . There ' s nothing half so mortal as a grey goose feather.Jon had never been half the hunter that Theon was, but he was no stranger to the longbow either . There were dark shapes slipping around the armory, backs against the stone, but he could not see them well enough to waste an arrow . He heard distant shouts, and saw the archers on the Tower of Guards loosing shafts at the ground . That was too far off to concern Jon . But when he glimpsed three shadows detach themselves from the old stables fifty yards away, he stepped up to the crenel, raised his bow, and drew . They were running, so he led them, waiting, waiting . . .The arrow made a soft hiss as it left his string . A moment later there was a grunt, and suddenly only two shadows were loping across the yard . They ran all the faster, but Jon had already pulled a second arrow from his quiver . This time he hurried the shot too much, and missed . The wildlings were gone by the time he nocked again . He searched for another target, and found four, rushing around the empty shell of the Lord Commander ' s Keep . The moonlight glimmered off their spears and axes, and the gruesome devices on their round leathern shields; skulls and bones, serpents, bear claws, twisted demonic faces . Free folk, he knew . The Thenns carried shields of black boiled leather with bronze rims and bosses, but theirs were plain and unadorned . These were the lighter wicker shields of raiders.Jon pulled the goose feather back to his ear, aimed, and loosed the arrow, then nocked and drew and loosed again . The first shaft pierced the bearclaw shield, the second one a throat . The wildling screamed as he went down . He heard the deep thrum of Deaf Dick ' s crossbow to his left, and Satin ' s a moment later . I got one! the boy cried hoarsely . I got one in the chest.Jon called . [BOS] Get another, [EOS] He did not have to search for targets now; only choose them . He dropped a wildling archer as he was fitting an arrow to his string, then sent a shaft toward the axeman hacking at the door of Hardin ' s Tower . That time he missed, but the arrow quivering in the oak made the wildling reconsider . It was only as he was running off that Jon recognized Big Boil . Half a heartbeat later, old Mully put an arrow through his leg from the roof of the Flint Barracks, and he crawled off bleeding . That will stop him bitching about his boil, Jon thought.When his quiver was empty, he went to get another, and moved to a different crenel, side by side with Deaf Dick Follard . Jon got off three arrows for every bolt Deaf Dick discharged, but that was the advantage of the longbow . The crossbow penetrated better, some insisted, but it was slow and cumbersome to reload . He could hear the wildlings shouting to each other, and somewhere to the west a warhorn blew . The world was moonlight and shadow, and time became an endless round of notch and draw and loose . A wildling arrow ripped through the throat of the straw sentinel beside him, but Jon Snow scarcely noticed . Give me one clean shot at the Magnar of Thenn, he prayed to his father ' s gods . The Magnar at least was a foe that he could hate . Give me Styr.His fingers were growing stiff and his thumb was bleeding, but still Jon notched and drew and loosed . A gout of flame caught his eye, and he turned to see the door of the common hall afire . It was only a few moments before the whole great timbered hall was burning . Three-Finger Hobb and his Mole ' s Town helpers were safe atop the Wall, he knew, but it felt like a punch in the belly all the same . JON, Deaf Dick yelled in his thick voice, the armory . They were on the roof, he saw . One had a torch . Dick hopped up on the crenel for a better shot, jerked his crossbow to his shoulder, and sent a quarrel thrumming toward the torch man . He missed.The archer down below him didn ' t.Follard never made a sound, only toppled forward headlong over the parapet . It was a hundred feet to the yard below . Jon heard the thump as he was peering round a straw soldier, trying to see where the arrow had come from . Not ten feet from Deaf Dick ' s body, he glimpsed a leather shield, a ragged cloak, a mop of thick red hair . Kissed by fire, he thought, lucky . He brought his bow up, but his fingers would not part, and she was gone as suddenly as she ' d appeared . He swiveled, cursing, and loosed a shaft at the men on the armory roof instead, but he missed them as well.By then the east stables were afire too, black smoke and wisps of burning hay pouring from the stalls . When the roof collapsed, flames rose up roaring, so loud they almost drowned out the warhorns of the Thenns . Fifty of them were pounding up the kingsroad in tight column, their shields held up above their heads . Others were swarming through the vegetable garden, across the flagstone yard, around the old dry well . Three had hacked their way through the doors of Maester Aemon ' s apartments in the timber keep below the rookery, and a desperate fight was going on atop the Silent Tower, longswords against bronze axes . None of that mattered . The dance has moved on, he thought.Jon hobbled across to Satin and grabbed him by the shoulder . [BOS] With me, [EOS] he shouted . Together they moved to the north parapet, where the King ' s Tower looked down on the gate and Donal Noye ' s makeshift wall of logs and barrels and sacks of corn . The Thenns were there before them . They wore halfhelms, and had thin bronze disks sewn to their long leather shirts . Many wielded bronze axes, though a few were chipped stone . More had short stabbing spears with leaf-shaped heads that gleamed redly in the light from the burning stables . They were screaming in the Old Tongue as they stormed the barricade, jabbing with their spears, swinging their bronze axes, spilling corn and blood with equal abandon while crossbow quarrels and arrows rained down on them from the archers that Donal Noye had posted on the stair.What do we do? Satin shouted.Jon shouted back, a black arrow in his hand . [BOS] We kill them, [EOS] No archer could have asked for an easier shot . The Thenns had their backs to the King ' s Tower as they charged the crescent, clambering over bags and barrels to reach the men in black . Both Jon and Satin chanced to choose the same target . He had just reached the top of the barricade when an arrow sprouted from his neck and a quarrel between his shoulder blades . Half a heartbeat later a longsword took him in the belly and he fell back onto the man behind him . Jon reached down to his quiver and found it empty again . Satin was winding back his crossbow . He left him to it and went for more arrows, but he hadn ' t taken more than three steps before the trap slammed open three feet in front of him . Bloody hell, I never even heard the door break.There was no time to think or plan or shout for help . Jon dropped his bow, reached back over his shoulder, ripped Longclaw from its sheath, and buried the blade in the middle of the first head to pop out of the tower . Bronze was no match for Valyrian steel . The blow sheared right through the Thenn ' s helm and deep into his skull, and he went crashing back down where he ' d come from . There were more behind him, Jon knew from the shouting . He fell back and called to Satin . The next man to make the climb got a quarrel through his cheek . He vanished too . The oil, Jon said . Satin nodded . Together they snatched up the thick quilted pads they ' d left beside the fire, lifted the heavy kettle of boiling oil, and dumped it down the hole on the Thenns below . The shrieks were as bad as anything he had ever heard, and Satin looked as though he was going to be sick . Jon kicked the trapdoor shut, set the heavy iron kettle on top of it, and gave the boy with the pretty face a hard shake . Retch later, Jon yelled . Come.They had only been gone from the parapets for a few moments, but everything below had changed . A dozen black brothers and a few Mole ' s Town men still stood atop the crates and barrels, but the wildlings were swarming over all along the crescent, pushing them back . Jon saw one shove his spear up through Rast ' s belly so hard he lifted him into the air . Young Henly was dead and Old Henly was dying, surrounded by foes . He could see Easy spinning and slashing, laughing like a loon, his cloak flapping as he leapt from cask to cask . A bronze axe caught him just below the knee and the laughter turned into a bubbling shriek.They ' re breaking, Satin said.No, said Jon, they ' re broken.It happened quickly . One mole fled and then another, and suddenly all the villagers were throwing down their weapons and abandoning the barricade . The brothers were too few to hold alone . Jon watched them try and form a line to fall back in order, but the Thenns washed over them with spear and axe, and then they were fleeing too . Dornish Dilly slipped and went down on his face, and a wildling planted a spear between his shoulder blades . Kegs, slow and short of breath, had almost reached the bottom step when a Thenn caught the end of his cloak and yanked him around . . . but a crossbow quarrel dropped the man before his axe could fall . Got him, Satin crowed, as Kegs staggered to the stair and began to crawl up the steps on hands and knees.The gate is lost . Donal Noye had closed and chained it, but it was there for the taking, the iron bars glimmering red with reflected firelight, the cold black tunnel behind . No one had fallen back to defend it; the only safety was on top of the Wall, seven hundred feet up the crooked wooden stairs.Jon asked Satin . [BOS] What gods do you pray to? [EOS] The Seven, the boy from Oldtown said.Jon told him . [BOS] Pray, then, Pray to your new gods, and I ' ll pray to my old ones . [EOS] It all turned here.With the confusion at the trapdoor, Jon had forgotten to fill his quiver . He limped back across the roof and did that now, and picked up his bow as well . The kettle had not moved from where he ' d left it, so it seemed as though they were safe enough for the nonce . The dance has moved on, and we ' re watching from the gallery, he thought as he hobbled back . Satin was loosing quarrels at the wildlings on the steps, then ducking down behind a merlon to cock the crossbow . He may be pretty, but he ' s quick.The real battle was on the steps . Noye had put spearmen on the two lowest landings, but the headlong flight of the villagers had panicked them and they had joined the flight, racing up toward the third landing with the Thenns killing anyone who fell behind . The archers and crossbowmen on the higher landings were trying to drop shafts over their heads . Jon nocked an arrow, drew, and loosed, and was pleased when one of the wildlings went rolling down the steps . The heat of the fires was making the Wall weep, and the flames danced and shimmered against the ice . The steps shook to the footsteps of men running for their lives.Again Jon notched and drew and loosed, but there was only one of him and one of Satin, and a good sixty or seventy Thenns pounding up the stairs, killing as they went, drunk on victory . On the fourth landing, three brothers in black cloaks stood shoulder to shoulder with longswords in their hands, and battle was joined again, briefly . But there were only three and soon enough the wildling tide washed over them, and their blood dripped down the steps . A man is never so vulnerable in battle as when he flees, Lord Eddard had told Jon once . A running man is like a wounded animal to a soldier . It gets his bloodlust up . The archers on the fifth landing fled before the battle even reached them . It was a rout, a red rout.Jon told Satin . There were four of them stacked beside the fire, their heads wrapped in oily rags . There were a dozen fire arrows too . The Oldtown boy thrust one torch into the fire until it was blazing brightly, and brought the rest back under his arm, unlit . He looked frightened again, as well he might . Jon was frightened too . [BOS] Fetch the torches, [EOS] It was then that he saw Styr . The Magnar was climbing up the barricade, over the gutted corn sacks and smashed barrels and the bodies of friends and foe alike . His bronze scale armor gleamed darkly in the firelight . Styr had taken off his helm to survey the scene of his triumph, and the bald earless whoreson was smiling . In his hand was a long weirwood spear with an ornate bronze head . When he saw the gate, he pointed the spear at it and barked something in the Old Tongue to the half-dozen Thenns around him . Too late, Jon thought . You should have led your men over the barricade, you might have been able to save a few.Up above, a warhorn sounded, long and low . Not from the top of the Wall, but from the ninth landing, some two hundred feet up, where Donal Noye was standing.Jon notched a fire arrow to his bowstring, and Satin lit it from the torch . He stepped to the parapet, drew, aimed, loosed . Ribbons of flame trailed behind as the shaft sped downward and thudded into its target, crackling.Not Styr . The steps . Or more precisely, the casks and kegs and sacks that Donal Noye had piled up beneath the steps, as high as the first landing; the barrels of lard and lamp oil, the bags of leaves and oily rags, the split logs, bark, and wood shavings . Again, said Jon, and, Again, and, Again . Other longbowmen were firing too, from every tower top in range, some sending their arrows up in high arcs to drop before the Wall . When Jon ran out of fire arrows, he and Satin began to light the torches and fling them from the crenels.Up above another fire was blooming . The old wooden steps had drunk up oil like a sponge, and Donal Noye had drenched them from the ninth landing all the way down to the seventh . Jon could only hope that most of their own people had staggered up to safety before Noye threw the torches . The black brothers at least had known the plan, but the villagers had not.Wind and fire did the rest . All Jon had to do was watch . With flames below and flames above, the wildlings had nowhere to go . Some continued upward, and died . Some went downward, and died . Some stayed where they were . They died as well . Many leapt from the steps before they burned, and died from the fall . Twenty-odd Thenns were still huddled together between the fires when the ice cracked from the heat, and the whole lower third of the stair broke off, along with several tons of ice . That was the last that Jon Snow saw of Styr, the Magnar of Thenn . The Wall defends itself, he thought.Jon asked Satin to help him down to the yard . His wounded leg hurt so badly that he could hardly walk, even with the crutch . Bring the torch, he told the boy from Oldtown . I need to look for someone . It had been mostly Thenns on the steps . Surely some of the free folk had escaped . Mance ' s people, not the Magnar ' s . She might have been one . So they climbed down past the bodies of the men who ' d tried the trapdoor, and Jon wandered through the dark with his crutch under one arm, and the other around the shoulders of a boy who ' d been a whore in Oldtown.The stables and the common hall had burned down to smoking cinders by then, but the fire still raged along the wall, climbing step by step and landing by landing . From time to time they ' d hear a groan and then a craaaack, and another chunk would come crashing off the Wall . The air was full of ash and ice crystals.He found Quort dead, and Stone Thumbs dying . He found some dead and dying Thenns he had never truly known . He found Big Boil, weak from all the blood he ' d lost but still alive.He found Ygritte sprawled across a patch of old snow beneath the Lord Commander ' s Tower, with an arrow between her breasts . The ice crystals had settled over her face, and in the moonlight it looked as though she wore a glittering silver mask.The arrow was black, Jon saw, but it was fletched with white duck feathers . Not mine, he told himself, not one of mine . But he felt as if it were.When he knelt in the snow beside her, her eyes opened . Jon Snow, she said, very softly . It sounded as though the arrow had found a lung . Is this a proper castle now? Not just a tower?It is . Jon took her hand.Good, she whispered . I wanted t ' see one proper castle, before . . . before I . . .You ' ll see a hundred castles, he promised her . The battle ' s done . Maester Aemon will see to you . He touched her hair . You ' re kissed by fire, remember? Lucky . It will take more than an arrow to kill you . Aemon will draw it out and patch you up, and we ' ll get you some milk of the poppy for the pain.She just smiled at that . D ' you remember that cave? We should have stayed in that cave . I told you so.We ' ll go back to the cave, he said . You ' re not going to die, Ygritte . You ' re not.Oh . Ygritte cupped his cheek with her hand . You know nothing, Jon Snow, she sighed, dying.He dreamt he was back in Winterfell, limping past the stone kings on their thrones . Their grey granite eyes turned to follow him as he passed, and their grey granite fingers tightened on the hilts of the rusted swords upon their laps . You are no Stark, he could hear them mutter, in heavy granite voices . There is no place for you here . Go away . He walked deeper into the darkness . Father? he called . Bran? Rickon? No one answered . A chill wind was blowing on his neck . Uncle? he called . Uncle Benjen? Father? Please, Father, help me . Up above he heard drums . They are feasting in the Great Hall, but I am not welcome there . I am no Stark, and this is not my place . His crutch slipped and he fell to his knees . The crypts were growing darker . A light has gone out somewhere . Ygritte? he whispered . Forgive me . Please . But it was only a direwolf, grey and ghastly, spotted with blood, his golden eyes shining sadly through the dark . . .The cell was dark, the bed hard beneath him . His own bed, he remembered, his own bed in his steward ' s cell beneath the Old Bear ' s chambers . By rights it should have brought him sweeter dreams . Even beneath the furs, he was cold . Ghost had shared his cell before the ranging, warming it against the chill of night . And in the wild, Ygritte had slept beside him . Both gone now . He had burned Ygritte himself, as he knew she would have wanted, and Ghost . . . Where are you? Was he dead as well, was that what his dream had meant, the bloody wolf in the crypts? But the wolf in the dream had been grey, not white . Grey, like Bran ' s wolf . Had the Thenns hunted him down and killed him after Queenscrown? If so, Bran was lost to him for good and all.Jon was trying to make sense of that when the horn blew.The Horn of Winter, he thought, still confused from sleep . But Mance never found Joramun ' s horn, so that couldn ' t be . A second blast followed, as long and deep as the first . Jon had to get up and go to the Wall, he knew, but it was so hard . . .He shoved aside his furs and sat . The pain in his leg seemed duller, nothing he could not stand . He had slept in his breeches and tunic and smallclothes, for the added warmth, so he had only to pull on his boots and don leather and mail and cloak . The horn blew again, two long blasts, so he slung Longclaw over one shoulder, found his crutch, and hobbled down the steps.It was the black of night outside, bitter cold and overcast . His brothers were spilling out of towers and keeps, buckling their swordbelts and walking toward the Wall . Jon looked for Pyp and Grenn, but could not find them . Perhaps one of them was the sentry blowing the horn . It is Mance, he thought . He has come at last . That was good . We will fight a battle, and then we ' ll rest . Alive or dead, we ' ll rest.Where the stair had been, only an immense tangle of charred wood and broken ice remained below the Wall . The winch raised them up now, but the cage was only big enough for ten men at a time, and it was already on its way up by the time Jon arrived . He would need to wait for its return . Others waited with him; Satin, Mully, Spare Boot, Kegs, big blond Hareth with his buck teeth . Everyone called him Horse . He had been a stablehand in Mole ' s Town, one of the few moles who had stayed at Castle Black . The rest had run back to their fields and hovels, or their beds in the underground brothel . Horse wanted to take the black, though, the great buck-toothed fool . Zei remained as well, the whore who ' d proved so handy with a crossbow, and Noye had kept three orphan boys whose father had died on the steps . They were young—nine and eight and five—but no one else seemed to want them.As they waited for the cage to come back, Clydas brought them cups of hot mulled wine, while Three-Finger Hobb passed out chunks of black bread . Jon took a heel from him and gnawed on it.Is it Mance Rayder? Satin asked anxiously.We can hope so . There were worse things than wildlings in the dark . Jon remembered the words the wildling king had spoken on the Fist of the First Men, as they stood amidst that pink snow . When the dead walk, walls and stakes and swords mean nothing . You cannot fight the dead, Jon Snow . No man knows that half so well as me . Just thinking of it made the wind seem a little colder.Finally the cage came clanking back down, swaying at the end of the long chain, and they crowded in silently and shut the door.Mully yanked the bell rope three times . A moment later they began to rise, by fits and starts at first, then more smoothly . No one spoke . At the top the cage swung sideways and they clambered out one by one . Horse gave Jon a hand down onto the ice . The cold hit him in the teeth like a fist.A line of fires burned along the top of the Wall, contained in iron baskets on poles taller than a man . The cold knife of the wind stirred and swirled the flames, so the lurid orange light was always shifting . Bundles of quarrels, arrows, spears, and scorpion bolts stood ready on every hand . Rocks were piled ten feet high, big wooden barrels of pitch and lamp oil lined up beside them . Bowen Marsh had left Castle Black well supplied in everything save men . The wind was whipping at the black cloaks of the scarecrow sentinels who stood along the ramparts, spears in hand . Jon said to Donal Noye when he limped up beside him . [BOS] I hope it wasn ' t one of them who blew the horn, [EOS] Did you hear that? Noye asked.There was the wind, and horses, and something else . Jon said . [BOS] A mammoth, That was a mammoth . [EOS] The armorer ' s breath was frosting as it blew from his broad, flat nose . North of the Wall was a sea of darkness that seemed to stretch forever . Jon could make out the faint red glimmer of distant fires moving through the wood . It was Mance, certain as sunrise . The Others did not light torches.How do we fight them if we can ' t see them? Horse asked.Donal Noye turned toward the two great trebuchets that Bowen Marsh had restored to working order . Give me light! he roared.Barrels of pitch were loaded hastily into the slings and set afire with a torch . The wind fanned the flames to a brisk red fury . NOW! Noye bellowed . The counterweights plunged downward, the throwing arms rose to thud against the padded crossbars . The burning pitch went tumbling through the darkness, casting an eerie flickering light upon the ground below . Jon caught a glimpse of mammoths moving ponderously through the half-light, and just as quickly lost them again . A dozen, maybe more . The barrels struck the earth and burst . They heard a deep bass trumpeting, and a giant roared something in the Old Tongue, his voice an ancient thunder that sent shivers up Jon ' s spine.Again! Noye shouted, and the trebuchets were loaded once more . Two more barrels of burning pitch went crackling through the gloom to come crashing down amongst the foe . This time one of them struck a dead tree, enveloping it in flame . Not a dozen mammoths, Jon saw, a hundred.He stepped to the edge of the precipice . Careful, he reminded himself, it is a long way down . Red Alyn sounded his sentry ' s horn once more, Aaaaahoooooooooooooooooooooooooo, aaaaahoooooooooooooooooooo . And now the wildlings answered, not with one horn but with a dozen, and with drums and pipes as well . We are come, they seemed to say, we are come to break your Wall, to take your lands and steal your daughters . The wind howled, the trebuchets creaked and thumped, the barrels flew . Behind the giants and the mammoths, Jon saw men advancing on the Wall with bows and axes . Were there twenty or twenty thousand? In the dark there was no way to tell . This is a battle of blind men, but Mance has a few thousand more of them than we do.The gate! Pyp cried out . They ' re at the GATE!The Wall was too big to be stormed by any conventional means; too high for ladders or siege towers, too thick for battering rams . No catapult could throw a stone large enough to breach it, and if you tried to set it on fire, the icemelt would quench the flames . You could climb over, as the raiders did near Greyguard, but only if you were strong and fit and sure-handed, and even then you might end up like Jarl, impaled on a tree . They must take the gate, or they cannot pass.But the gate was a crooked tunnel through the ice, smaller than any castle gate in the Seven Kingdoms, so narrow that rangers must lead their garrons through single file . Three iron grates closed the inner passage, each locked and chained and protected by a murder hole . The outer door was old oak, nine inches thick and studded with iron, not easy to break through . But Mance has mammoths, he reminded himself, and giants as well.Must be cold down there, said Noye . What say we warm them up, lads? A dozen jars of lamp oil had been lined up on the precipice . Pyp ran down the line with a torch, setting them alight . Owen the Oaf followed, shoving them over the edge one by one . Tongues of pale yellow fire swirled around the jars as they plunged downward . When the last was gone, Grenn kicked loose the chocks on a barrel of pitch and sent it rumbling and rolling over the edge as well . The sounds below changed to shouts and screams, sweet music to their ears.Yet still the drums beat on, the trebuchets shuddered and thumped, and the sound of skinpipes came wafting through the night like the songs of strange fierce birds . Septon Cellador began to sing as well, his voice tremulous and thick with wine.Gentle Mother, font of mercy,save our sons from war, we pray,stay the swords and stay the arrows,let them know . . .Donal Noye rounded on him . Any man here stays his sword, I ' ll chuck his puckered arse right off this Wall . . . starting with you, Septon . Archers! Do we have any bloody archers?Here, said Satin.And here, said Mully . But how can I find a target? It ' s black as the inside of a pig ' s belly . Where are they?Noye pointed north . Loose enough arrows, might be you ' ll find a few . At least you ' ll make them fretful . He looked around the ring of firelit faces . I need two bows and two spears to help me hold the tunnel if they break the gate . More than ten stepped forward, and the smith picked his four . Jon, you have the Wall till I return.For a moment Jon thought he had misheard . It had sounded as if Noye were leaving him in command . My lord?Lord? I ' m a blacksmith . I said, the Wall is yours.There are older men, Jon wanted to say, better men . I am still as green as summer grass . I ' m wounded, and I stand accused of desertion . His mouth had gone bone dry . Aye, he managed.Afterward it would seem to Jon Snow as if he ' d dreamt that night . Side by side with the straw soldiers, with longbows or crossbows clutched in half-frozen hands, his archers launched a hundred flights of arrows against men they never saw . From time to time a wildling arrow came flying back in answer . He sent men to the smaller catapults and filled the air with jagged rocks the size of a giant ' s fist, but the darkness swallowed them as a man might swallow a handful of nuts . Mammoths trumpeted in the gloom, strange voices called out in stranger tongues, and Septon Cellador prayed so loudly and drunkenly for the dawn to come that Jon was tempted to chuck him over the edge himself . They heard a mammoth dying at their feet and saw another lurch burning through the woods, trampling down men and trees alike . The wind blew cold and colder . Hobb rode up the chain with cups of onion broth, and Owen and Clydas served them to the archers where they stood, so they could gulp them down between arrows . Zei took a place among them with her crossbow . Hours of repeated jars and shocks knocked something loose on the right-hand trebuchet, and its counterweight came crashing free, suddenly and catastrophically, wrenching the throwing arm sideways with a splintering crash . The left-hand trebuchet kept throwing, but the wildlings had quickly learned to shun the place where its loads were landing.We should have twenty trebuchets, not two, and they should be mounted on sledges and turntables so we could move them . It was a futile thought . He might as well wish for another thousand men, and maybe a dragon or three.Donal Noye did not return, nor any of them who ' d gone down with him to hold that black cold tunnel . The Wall is mine, Jon reminded himself whenever he felt his strength flagging . He had taken up a longbow himself, and his fingers felt crabbed and stiff, half-frozen . His fever was back as well, and his leg would tremble uncontrollably, sending a white-hot knife of pain right through him . One more arrow, and I ' ll rest, he told himself, half a hundred times . Just one more . Whenever his quiver was empty, one of the orphaned moles would bring him another . One more quiver, and I ' m done . It couldn ' t be long until the dawn.When morning came, none of them quite realized it at first . The world was still dark, but the black had turned to grey and shapes were beginning to emerge half-seen from the gloom . Jon lowered his bow to stare at the mass of heavy clouds that covered the eastern sky . He could see a glow behind them, but perhaps he was only dreaming . He notched another arrow.Then the rising sun broke through to send pale lances of light across the battleground . Jon found himself holding his breath as he looked out over the half-mile swath of cleared land that lay between the Wall and the edge of the forest . In half a night they had turned it into a wasteland of blackened grass, bubbling pitch, shattered stone, and corpses . The carcass of the burned mammoth was already drawing crows . There were giants dead on the ground as well, but behind them . . .Someone moaned to his left, and he heard Septon Cellador say, Mother have mercy, oh . Oh, oh, oh, Mother have mercy.Beneath the trees were all the wildlings in the world; raiders and giants, wargs and skinchangers, mountain men, salt sea sailors, ice river cannibals, cave dwellers with dyed faces, dog chariots from the Frozen Shore, Hornfoot men with their soles like boiled leather, all the queer wild folk Mance had gathered to break the Wall . This is not your land, Jon wanted to shout at them . There is no place for you here . Go away . He could hear Tormund Giantsbane laughing at that . You know nothing, Jon Snow, Ygritte would have said . He flexed his sword hand, opening and closing the fingers, though he knew full well that swords would not come into it up here.He was chilled and feverish, and suddenly the weight of the longbow was too much . The battle with the Magnar had been nothing, he realized, and the night fight less than nothing, only a probe, a dagger in the dark to try and catch them unprepared . The real battle was only now beginning.I never knew there would be so many, Satin said.Jon had . He had seen them before, but not like this, not drawn up in battle array . On the march the wildling column had sprawled over long leagues like some enormous worm, but you never saw all of it at once . But now . . .Here they come, someone said in a hoarse voice.Mammoths centered the wildling line, he saw, a hundred or more with giants on their backs clutching mauls and huge stone axes . More giants loped beside them, pushing along a tree trunk on great wooden wheels, its end sharpened to a point . A ram, he thought bleakly . If the gate still stood below, a few kisses from that thing would soon turn it into splinters . On either side of the giants came a wave of horsemen in boiled leather harness with fire-hardened lances, a mass of running archers, hundreds of foot with spears, slings, clubs, and leathern shields . The bone chariots from the Frozen Shore clattered forward on the flanks, bouncing over rocks and roots behind teams of huge white dogs . The fury of the wild, Jon thought as he listened to the skirl of skins, to the dogs barking and baying, the mammoths trumpeting, the free folk whistling and screaming, the giants roaring in the Old Tongue . Their drums echoed off the ice like rolling thunder.He could feel the despair all around him . There must be a hundred thousand, Satin wailed . How can we stop so many?The Wall will stop them, Jon heard himself say . He turned and said it again, louder . The Wall will stop them . The Wall defends itself . Hollow words, but he needed to say them, almost as much as his brothers needed to hear them . Mance wants to unman us with his numbers . Does he think we ' re stupid? He was shouting now, his leg forgotten, and every man was listening . The chariots, the horsemen, all those fools on foot . . . what are they going to do to us up here? Any of you ever see a mammoth climb a wall? He laughed, and Pyp and Owen and half a dozen more laughed with him . They ' re nothing, they ' re less use than our straw brothers here, they can ' t reach us, they can ' t hurt us, and they don ' t frighten us, do they?NO! Grenn shouted.They ' re down there and we ' re up here, Jon said, and so long as we hold the gate they cannot pass . They cannot pass! They were all shouting then, roaring his own words back at him, waving swords and longbows in the air as their cheeks flushed red . Jon saw Kegs standing there with a warhorn slung beneath his arm . Brother, he told him, sound for battle.Grinning, Kegs lifted the horn to his lips, and blew the two long blasts that meant wildlings . Other horns took up the call until the Wall itself seemed to shudder, and the echo of those great deep-throated moans drowned all other sound.Jon said when the horns had died away, [BOS] Archers, you ' ll aim for the giants with that ram, every bloody one of you . Loose at my command, not before . THE GIANTS AND THE RAM . I want arrows raining on them with every step, but we ' ll wait till they ' re in range . Any man who wastes an arrow will need to climb down and fetch it back, do you hear me? [EOS] I do, shouted Owen the Oaf . I hear you, Lord Snow.Jon laughed, laughed like a drunk or a madman, and his men laughed with him . The chariots and the racing horsemen on the flanks were well ahead of the center now, he saw . The wildlings had not crossed a third of the half mile, yet their battle line was dissolving . Load the trebuchet with caltrops, Jon said . Owen, Kegs, angle the catapults toward the center . Scorpions, load with fire spears and loose at my command . He pointed at the Mole ' s Town boys . You, you, and you, stand by with torches.The wildling archers shot as they advanced; they would dash forward, stop, loose, then run another ten yards . There were so many that the air was constantly full of arrows, all falling woefully short . A waste, Jon thought . Their want of discipline is showing . The smaller horn-and-wood bows of the free folk were outranged by the great yew longbows of the Night ' s Watch, and the wildlings were trying to shoot at men seven hundred feet above them . Let them shoot, Jon said . Wait . Hold . Their cloaks were flapping behind them . The wind is in our faces, it will cost us range . Wait . Closer, closer . The skins wailed, the drums thundered, the wildling arrows fluttered and fell.Jon lifted his own bow and pulled the arrow to his ear . Satin did the same, and Grenn, Owen the Oaf, Spare Boot, Black Jack Bulwer, Arron and Emrick . Zei hoisted her crossbow to her shoulder . Jon was watching the ram come on and on, the mammoths and giants lumbering forward on either side . They were so small he could have crushed them all in one hand, it seemed . If only my hand was big enough . Through the killing ground they came . A hundred crows rose from the carcass of the dead mammoth as the wildlings thundered past to either side of them . Closer and closer, until . . . [BOS] DRAW . [EOS] The black arrows hissed downward, like snakes on feathered wings . Jon did not wait to see where they struck . He reached for a second arrow as soon as the first left his bow . NOTCH . DRAW . LOOSE . As soon as the arrow flew he found another . NOTCH . DRAW . LOOSE . Again, and then again . Jon shouted for the trebuchet, and heard the creak and heavy thud as a hundred spiked steel caltrops went spinning through the air . Catapults, he called, scorpions . Bowmen, loose at will . Wildling arrows were striking the Wall now, a hundred feet below them . A second giant spun and staggered . Notch, draw, loose . A mammoth veered into another beside it, spilling giants on the ground . Notch, draw, loose . The ram was down and done, he saw, the giants who ' d pushed it dead or dying . Fire arrows, he shouted . I want that ram burning . The screams of wounded mammoths and the booming cries of giants mingled with the drums and pipes to make an awful music, yet still his archers drew and loosed, as if they ' d all gone as deaf as dead Dick Follard . They might be the dregs of the order, but they were men of the Night ' s Watch, or near enough as made no matter . That ' s why they shall not pass.One of the mammoths was running berserk, smashing wildlings with his trunk and crushing archers underfoot . Jon pulled back his bow once more, and launched another arrow at the beast ' s shaggy back to urge him on . To east and west, the flanks of the wildling host had reached the Wall unopposed . The chariots drew in or turned while the horsemen milled aimlessly beneath the looming cliff of ice . At the gate! a shout came . Spare Boot, maybe . Mammoth at the gate!Jon barked . [BOS] Fire, Grenn, Pyp . [EOS] Grenn thrust his bow aside, wrestled a barrel of oil onto its side, and rolled it to the edge of the Wall, where Pyp hammered out the plug that sealed it, stuffed in a twist of cloth, and set it alight with a torch . They shoved it over together . A hundred feet below it struck the Wall and burst, filling the air with shattered staves and burning oil . Grenn was rolling a second barrel to the precipice by then, and Kegs had one as well . Pyp lit them both . Got him! Satin shouted, his head sticking out so far that Jon was certain he was about to fall . Got him, got him, GOT him! He could hear the roar of fire . A flaming giant lurched into view, stumbling and rolling on the ground.Then suddenly the mammoths were fleeing, running from the smoke and flames and smashing into those behind them in their terror . Those went backward too, the giants and wildlings behind them scrambling to get out of their way . In half a heartbeat the whole center was collapsing . The horsemen on the flanks saw themselves being abandoned and decided to fall back as well, not one so much as blooded . Even the chariots rumbled off, having done nothing but look fearsome and make a lot of noise . When they break, they break hard, Jon Snow thought as he watched them reel away . The drums had all gone silent . How do you like that music, Mance? How do you like the taste of the Dornishman ' s wife? Do we have anyone hurt? he asked.The bloody buggers got my leg . Spare Boot plucked the arrow out and waved it above his head . The wooden one!A ragged cheer went up . Zei grabbed Owen by the hands, spun him around in a circle, and gave him a long wet kiss right there for all to see . She tried to kiss Jon too, but he held her by the shoulder and pushed her gently but firmly away . No, he said . I am done with kissing . Suddenly he was too weary to stand, and his leg was agony from knee to groin . He fumbled for his crutch . Pyp, help me to the cage . Grenn, you have the Wall.Me? said Grenn . Him? said Pyp . It was hard to tell which of them was more horrified . But, Grenn stammered, b-but what do I do if the wildlings attack again?Jon told him . [BOS] Stop them, [EOS] As they rode down in the cage, Pyp took off his helm and wiped his brow . Frozen sweat . Is there anything as disgusting as frozen sweat? He laughed . Gods, I don ' t think I have ever been so hungry . I could eat an aurochs whole, I swear it . Do you think Hobb will cook up Grenn for us? When he saw Jon ' s face, his smile died . What ' s wrong? Is it your leg?Jon agreed . Even the words were an effort . [BOS] My leg, [EOS] Not the battle, though? We won the battle.Jon said grimly . I want a fire, a hot meal, a warm bed, and something to make my leg stop hurting, he told himself . But first he had to check the tunnel and find what had become of Donal Noye . [BOS] Ask me when I ' ve seen the gate, [EOS] After the battle with the Thenns it had taken them almost a day to clear the ice and broken beams away from the inner gate . Spotted Pate and Kegs and some of the other builders had argued heatedly that they ought just leave the debris there, another obstacle for Mance . That would have meant abandoning the defense of the tunnel, though, and Noye was having none of it . With men in the murder holes and archers and spears behind each inner grate, a few determined brothers could hold off a hundred times as many wildlings and clog the way with corpses . He did not mean to give Mance Rayder free passage through the ice . So with pick and spade and ropes, they had moved the broken steps aside and dug back down to the gate.Jon waited by the cold iron bars while Pyp went to Maester Aemon for the spare key . Surprisingly, the maester himself returned with him, and Clydas with a lantern . Come see me when we are done, the old man told Jon while Pyp was fumbling with the chains . I need to change your dressing and apply a fresh poultice, and you will want some more dreamwine for the pain.Jon nodded weakly . The door swung open . Pyp led them in, followed by Clydas and the lantern . It was all Jon could do to keep up with Maester Aemon . The ice pressed close around them, and he could feel the cold seeping into his bones, the weight of the Wall above his head . It felt like walking down the gullet of an ice dragon . The tunnel took a twist, and then another . Pyp unlocked a second iron gate . They walked farther, turned again, and saw light ahead, faint and pale through the ice . That ' s bad, Jon knew at once . That ' s very bad.Then Pyp said, There ' s blood on the floor.The last twenty feet of the tunnel was where they ' d fought and died . The outer door of studded oak had been hacked and broken and finally torn off its hinges, and one of the giants had crawled in through the splinters . The lantern bathed the grisly scene in a sullen reddish light . Pyp turned aside to retch, and Jon found himself envying Maester Aemon his blindness.Noye and his men had been waiting within, behind a gate of heavy iron bars like the two Pyp had just unlocked . The two crossbows had gotten off a dozen quarrels as the giant struggled toward them . Then the spearmen must have come to the fore, stabbing through the bars . Still the giant found the strength to reach through, twist the head off Spotted Pate, seize the iron gate, and wrench the bars apart . Links of broken chain lay strewn across the floor . One giant . All this was the work of one giant.Are they all dead? Maester Aemon asked softly.Yes . Donal was the last . Noye ' s sword was sunk deep in the giant ' s throat, halfway to the hilt . The armorer had always seemed such a big man to Jon, but locked in the giant ' s massive arms he looked almost like a child . The giant crushed his spine . I don ' t know who died first . He took the lantern and moved forward for a better look . Mag . I am the last of the giants . He could feel the sadness there, but he had no time for sadness . It was Mag the Mighty . The king of the giants.He needed sun then . It was too cold and dark inside the tunnel, and the stench of blood and death was suffocating . Jon gave the lantern back to Clydas, squeezed around the bodies and through the twisted bars, and walked toward the daylight to see what lay beyond the splintered door.The huge carcass of a dead mammoth partially blocked the way . One of the beast ' s tusks snagged his cloak and tore it as he edged past . Three more giants lay outside, half buried beneath stone and slush and hardened pitch . He could see where the fire had melted the Wall, where great sheets of ice had come sloughing off in the heat to shatter on the blackened ground . He looked up at where they ' d come from . When you stand here it seems immense, as if it were about to crush you.Jon went back inside to where the others waited . [BOS] We need to repair the outer gate as best we can and then block up this section of the tunnel . Rubble, chunks of ice, anything . All the way to the second gate, if we can . Ser Wynton will need to take command, he ' s the last knight left, but he needs to move now, the giants will be back before we know it . We have to tell him— [EOS] Tell him what you will, said Maester Aemon, gently . He will smile, nod, and forget . Thirty years ago Ser Wynton Stout came within a dozen votes of being Lord Commander . He would have made a fine one . Ten years ago he would still have been capable . No longer . You know that as well as Donal did, Jon.It was true . Jon told the maester . [BOS] You give the order, then, You have been on the Wall your whole life, the men will follow you . We have to close the gate . [EOS] I am a maester chained and sworn . My order serves, Jon . We give counsel, not commands.Someone must—You . You must lead.Yes, Jon . It need not be for long . Only until such time as the garrison returns . Donal chose you, and Qhorin Halfhand before him . Lord Commander Mormont made you his steward . You are a son of Winterfell, a nephew of Benjen Stark . It must be you or no one . The Wall is yours, Jon Snow.Day and night the axes rang.Jon could not remember the last time he had slept . When he closed his eyes he dreamed of fighting; when he woke he fought . Even in the King ' s Tower he could hear the ceaseless thunk of bronze and flint and stolen steel biting into wood, and it was louder when he tried to rest in the warming shed atop the Wall . Mance had sledgehammers at work as well, and long saws with teeth of bone and flint . Once, as he was drifting off into an exhausted sleep, there came a great cracking from the haunted forest, and a sentinel tree came crashing down in a cloud of dirt and needles.He was awake when Owen came to him, lying restless under a pile of furs on the floor of the warming shed . Lord Snow, said Owen, shaking his shoulder, the dawn . He gave Jon a hand to help pull him back onto his feet . Others were waking as well, jostling one another as they pulled on their boots and buckled their swordbelts in the close confines of the shed . No one spoke . They were all too tired for talk . Few of them ever left the Wall these days . It took too long to ride up and down in the cage . Castle Black had been abandoned to Maester Aemon, Ser Wynton Stout, and a few others too old or ill to fight.I had a dream that the king had come, Owen said happily . Maester Aemon sent a raven, and King Robert came with all his strength . I dreamed I saw his golden banners.Jon made himself smile . [BOS] That would be a welcome sight to see, Owen . [EOS] Ignoring the twinge of pain in his leg, he swept a black fur cloak about his shoulders, gathered up his crutch, and went out onto the Wall to face another day.A gust of wind sent icy tendrils wending through his long brown hair . Half a mile north, the wildling encampments were stirring, their campfires sending up smoky fingers to scratch against the pale dawn sky . Along the edge of the forest they had raised their tents of hide and fur, even a crude longhall of logs and woven branches; there were horselines to the east, mammoths to the west, and men everywhere, sharpening their swords, putting points on crude spears, donning makeshift armor of hide and horn and bone . For every man that he could see, Jon knew there were a score unseen in the wood . The brush gave them some shelter from the elements and hid them from the eyes of the hated crows.Already their archers were stealing forward, pushing their rolling mantlets . Here come our breakfast arrows, Pyp announced cheerfully, as he did every morning . It ' s good that he can make a jape of it, Jon thought . Someone has to . Three days ago, one of those breakfast arrows had caught Red Alyn of the Rosewood in the leg . You could still see his body at the foot of the Wall, if you cared to lean out far enough . Jon had to think that it was better for them to smile at Pyp ' s jest than to brood over Alyn ' s corpse.The mantlets were slanting wooden shields, wide enough for five of the free folk to hide behind . The archers pushed them close, then knelt behind them to loose their arrows through slits in the wood . The first time the wildlings rolled them out, Jon had called for fire arrows and set a half-dozen ablaze, but after that Mance started covering them with raw hides . All the fire arrows in the world couldn ' t make them catch now . The brothers had even started wagering as to which of the straw sentinels would collect the most arrows before they were done . Dolorous Edd was leading with four, but Othell Yarwyck, Tumberjon, and Watt of Long Lake had three apiece . It was Pyp who ' d started naming the scarecrows after their missing brothers, too . It makes it seem as if there ' s more of us, he said.More of us with arrows in our bellies, Grenn complained, but the custom did seem to give his brothers heart, so Jon let the names stand and the wagering continue.On the edge of the Wall an ornate brass Myrish eye stood on three spindly legs . Maester Aemon had once used it to peer at the stars, before his own eyes had failed him . Jon swung the tube down to have a look at the foe . Even at this distance there was no mistaking Mance Rayder ' s huge white tent, sewn together from the pelts of snow bears . The Myrish lenses brought the wildlings close enough for him to make out faces . Of Mance himself he saw no sign this morning, but his woman Dalla was outside tending the fire, while her sister Val milked a she-goat beside the tent . Dalla looked so big it was a wonder she could move . The child must be coming very soon, Jon thought . He swiveled the eye east and searched amongst the tents and trees till he found the turtle . That will be coming very soon as well . The wildlings had skinned one of the dead mammoths during the night, and they were lashing the raw bloody hide over the turtle ' s roof, one more layer on top of the sheepskins and pelts . The turtle had a rounded top and eight huge wheels, and under the hides was a stout wooden frame . When the wildlings had begun knocking it together, Satin thought they were building a ship . Not far wrong . The turtle was a hull turned upside down and opened fore and aft; a longhall on wheels.It ' s done, isn ' t it? asked Grenn.Jon shoved away the eye . [BOS] Near enough . It will come today, most like . Did you fill the barrels? [EOS] Every one . They froze hard during the night, Pyp checked.Grenn had changed a great deal from the big, clumsy, red-necked boy Jon had first befriended . He had grown half a foot, his chest and shoulders had thickened, and he had not cut his hair nor trimmed his beard since the Fist of the First Men . It made him look as huge and shaggy as an aurochs, the mocking name that Ser Alliser Thorne had hung on him during training . He looked weary now, though . When Jon said as much, he nodded . I heard their axes all night . Couldn ' t sleep for all the chopping.Then go sleep now.I don ' t need—You do . I want you rested . Go on, I ' m not going to let you sleep through the fight . He made himself smile . You ' re the only one who can move those bloody barrels.Grenn went off muttering, and Jon returned to the far eye, searching the wildling camp . From time to time an arrow would sail past overhead, but he had learned to ignore those . The range was long and the angle was bad, the chances of being hit were small . He still saw no sign of Mance Rayder in the camp, but he spied Tormund Giantsbane and two of his sons around the turtle . The sons were struggling with the mammoth hide while Tormund gnawed on the roast leg of a goat and bellowed orders . Elsewhere he found the wildling skinchanger, Varamyr Sixskins, walking through the trees with his shadowcat dogging his heels.When he heard the rattle of the winch chains and the iron groan of the cage door opening, he knew it would be Hobb bringing their breakfast as he did every morning . The sight of Mance ' s turtle had robbed Jon of his appetite . Their oil was all but gone, and the last barrel of pitch had been rolled off the Wall two nights ago . They would soon run short of arrows as well, and there were no fletchers making more . And the night before last, a raven had come from the west, from Ser Denys Mallister . Bowen Marsh had chased the wildlings all the way to the Shadow Tower, it seemed, and then farther, down into the gloom of the Gorge . At the Bridge of Skulls he had met the Weeper and three hundred wildlings and won a bloody battle . But the victory had been a costly one . More than a hundred brothers slain, among them Ser Endrew Tarth and Ser Aladale Wynch . The Old Pomegranate himself had been carried back to the Shadow Tower sorely wounded . Maester Mullin was tending him, but it would be some time before he was fit to return to Castle Black.When he had read that, Jon had dispatched Zei to Mole ' s Town on their best horse to plead with the villagers to help man the Wall . She never returned . When he sent Mully after her, he came back to report the whole village deserted, even the brothel . Most likely Zei had followed them, straight down the kingsroad . Maybe we should all do the same, Jon reflected glumly.He made himself eat, hungry or no . Bad enough he could not sleep, he could not go on without food as well . Besides, this might be my last meal . It might be the last meal for all of us . So it was that Jon had a belly full of bread, bacon, onions, and cheese when he heard Horse shout, IT ' S COMING!No one needed to ask what it was . Nor did Jon need the maester ' s Myrish eye to see it creeping out from amongst the tents and trees . It doesn ' t really look much like a turtle, Satin commented . Turtles don ' t have fur.Most of them don ' t have wheels either, said Pyp.Jon commanded, and Kegs blew two long blasts, to wake Grenn and the other sleepers who ' d had the watch during the night . If the wildlings were coming, the Wall would need every man . Gods know, we have few enough . Jon looked at Pyp and Kegs and Satin, Horse and Owen the Oaf, Tim Tangletongue, Mully, Spare Boot, and the rest, and tried to imagine them going belly to belly and blade to blade against a hundred screaming wildlings in the freezing darkness of that tunnel, with only a few iron bars between them . That was what it would come down to, unless they could stop the turtle before the gate was breached . [BOS] Sound the warhorn, [EOS] It ' s big, Horse said.Pyp smacked his lips . Think of all the soup it will make . The jape was stillborn . Even Pyp sounded tired . He looks half dead, thought Jon, but so do we all . The King-beyond-the-Wall had so many men that he could throw fresh attackers at them every time, but the same handful of black brothers had to meet every assault, and it had worn them ragged.The men beneath the wood and hides would be pulling hard, Jon knew, putting their shoulders into it, straining to keep the wheels turning, but once the turtle was flush against the gate they would exchange their ropes for axes . At least Mance was not sending his mammoths today . Jon was glad of that . Their awesome strength was wasted on the Wall, and their size only made them easy targets . The last had been a day and a half in the dying, its mournful trumpetings terrible to hear.The turtle crept slowly through stones and stumps and brush . The earlier attacks had cost the free folk a hundred lives or more . Most still lay where they had fallen . In the lulls the crows would come and pay them court, but now the birds fled screeching . They liked the look of that turtle no more than he did.Satin, Horse, and the others were looking to him, Jon knew, waiting for his orders . He was so tired, he hardly knew any more . The Wall is mine, he reminded himself . Owen, Horse, to the catapults . Kegs, you and Spare Boot on the scorpions . The rest of you string your bows . Fire arrows . Let ' s see if we can burn it . It was likely to be a futile gesture, Jon knew, but it had to be better than standing helpless.Cumbersome and slow-moving, the turtle made for an easy shot, and his archers and crossbowmen soon turned it into a lumbering wooden hedgehog . . . but the wet hides protected it, just as they had the mantlets, and the flaming arrows guttered out almost as soon as they struck . Jon cursed under his breath . Scorpions, he commanded . Catapults.The scorpions bolts punched deep into the pelts, but did no more damage than the fire arrows . The rocks went bouncing off the turtle ' s roof, leaving dimples in the thick layers of hides . A stone from one of the trebuchets might have crushed it, but the one machine was still broken, and the wildlings had gone wide around the area where the other dropped its loads.Jon, it ' s still coming, said Owen the Oaf.He could see that for himself . Inch by inch, yard by yard, the turtle crept closer, rolling, rumbling and rocking as it crossed the killing ground . Once the wildlings got it flush against the Wall, it would give them all the shelter they needed while their axes crashed through the hastily-repaired outer gates . Inside, under the ice, they would clear the loose rubble from the tunnel in a matter of hours, and then there would be nothing to stop them but two iron gates, a few half-frozen corpses, and whatever brothers Jon cared to throw in their path, to fight and die down in the dark.To his left, the catapult made a thunk and filled the air with spinning stones . They plonked down on the turtle like hail, and caromed harmlessly aside . The wildling archers were still loosing arrows from behind their mantlets . One thudded into the face of a straw man, and Pyp said, Four for Watt of Long Lake! We have a tie! The next shaft whistled past his own ear, however . Fie! he shouted down . I ' m not in the tourney!Jon said, as much to himself as to the others . Their only hope was to try and crush the turtle when it reached the Wall . For that, they needed boulders . No matter how stoutly built the turtle was, a huge chunk of rock crashing straight down on top of it from seven hundred feet was bound to do some damage . [BOS] The hides won ' t burn, Grenn, Owen, Kegs, it ' s time . [EOS] Alongside the warming shed a dozen stout oaken barrels were lined up in a row . They were full of crushed rock; the gravel that the black brothers customarily spread on the footpaths to give themselves better footing atop the Wall . Yesterday, after he ' d seen the free folk covering the turtle with sheepskins, Jon told Grenn to pour water into the barrels, as much as they would take . The water would seep down through the crushed stone, and overnight the whole thing would freeze solid . It was the nearest thing to a boulder they were going to get.Why do we need to freeze it? Grenn had asked him . Why don ' t we just roll the barrels off the way they are?Jon answered, [BOS] If they crash against the Wall on the way down they ' ll burst, and loose gravel will spray everywhere . We don ' t want to rain pebbles on the whoresons . [EOS] He put his shoulder to the one barrel with Grenn, while Kegs and Owen were wrestling with another . Together they rocked it back and forth to break the grip of the ice that had formed around its bottom . The bugger weighs a ton, said Grenn.Jon said . [BOS] Tip it over and roll it, Careful, if it rolls over your foot you ' ll end up like Spare Boot . [EOS] Once the barrel was on its side, Jon grabbed a torch and waved it above the surface of the Wall, back and forth, just enough to melt the ice a little . The thin film of water helped the barrel roll more easily . Too easily, in fact; they almost lost it . But finally, with four of them pooling their efforts, they rolled their boulder to the edge and stood it up again.They had four of the big oak barrels lined up above the gate by the time Pyp shouted, Jon braced his injured leg and leaned out for a look . Hoardings, Marsh should have built hoardings . So many things they should have done . The wildlings were dragging the dead giants away from the gate . Horse and Mully were dropping rocks down on them, and Jon thought he saw one man go down, but the stones were too small to have any effect on the turtle itself . He wondered what the free folk would do about the dead mammoth in the path, but then he saw . The turtle was almost as wide as a longhall, so they simply pushed it over the carcass . His leg twitched, but Horse caught his arm and drew him back to safety . [BOS] There ' s a turtle at our door! You shouldn ' t lean out like that, [EOS] the boy said.We should have built hoardings . Jon thought he could hear the crash of axes on wood, but that was probably just fear ringing in his ears . He looked to Grenn . Do it.Grenn got behind a barrel, put his shoulder against it, grunted, and began to push . Owen and Mully moved to help him . They shoved the barrel out a foot, and then another . And suddenly it was gone.They heard the thump as it struck the Wall on the way down, and then, much louder, the crash and crack of splintering wood, followed by shouts and screams . Satin whooped and Owen the Oaf danced in circles, while Pyp leaned out and called, The turtle was stuffed full of rabbits! Look at them hop away!Jon barked, and Grenn and Kegs slammed their shoulders against the next barrel, and sent it tottering out into empty air . [BOS] Again, [EOS] By the time they were done, the front of Mance ' s turtle was a crushed and splintered ruin, and wildlings were spilling out the other end and scrambling for their camp . Satin scooped up his crossbow and sent a few quarrels after them as they ran, to see them off the faster . Grenn was grinning through his beard, Pyp was making japes, and none of them would die today.On the morrow, though . . . Jon glanced toward the shed . Eight barrels of gravel remained where twelve had stood a few moments before . He realized how tired he was then, and how much his wound was hurting . I need to sleep . A few hours, at least . He could go to Maester Aemon for some dreamwine, that would help . I am going down to the King ' s Tower, he told them . Call me if Mance gets up to anything . Pyp, you have the Wall.Me? said Pyp.Him? said Grenn.Smiling, he left them to it and rode down in the cage.A cup of dreamwine did help, as it happened . No sooner had he stretched out on the narrow bed in his cell than sleep took him . His dreams were strange and formless, full of strange voices, shouts and cries, and the sound of a warhorn, blowing low and loud, a single deep booming note that lingered in the air.When he awoke the sky was black outside the arrow slit that served him for a window, and four men he did not know were standing over him . One held a lantern . Jon Snow, the tallest of them said brusquely, pull on your boots and come with us.His first groggy thought was that somehow the Wall had fallen whilst he slept, that Mance Rayder had sent more giants or another turtle and broken through the gate . But when he rubbed his eyes he saw that the strangers were all in black . They ' re men of the Night ' s Watch, Jon realized . Come where? Who are you?The tall man gestured, and two of the others pulled Jon from the bed . With the lantern leading the way they marched him from his cell and up a half turn of stair, to the Old Bear ' s solar . He saw Maester Aemon standing by the fire, his hands folded around the head of a blackthorn cane . Septon Cellador was half drunk as usual, and Ser Wynton Stout was asleep in a window seat . The other brothers were strangers to him . All but one.Immaculate in his fur-trimmed cloak and polished boots, Ser Alliser Thorne turned to say, Here ' s the turncloak now, my lord . Ned Stark ' s bastard, of Winterfell.Jon said coldly . [BOS] I ' m no turncloak, Thorne, [EOS] We shall see . In the leather chair behind the table where the Old Bear wrote his letters sat a big, broad, jowly man Jon did not know . Yes, we shall see, he said again . You will not deny that you are Jon Snow, I hope? Stark ' s bastard?Lord Snow, he likes to call himself . Ser Alliser was a spare, slim man, compact and sinewy, and just now his flinty eyes were dark with amusement.You ' re the one who named me Lord Snow, said Jon . Ser Alliser had been fond of naming the boys he trained, during his time as Castle Black ' s master-at-arms . The Old Bear had sent Thorne to Eastwatch-by-the-Sea . These others must be Eastwatch men . The bird reached Cotter Pyke and he ' s sent us help . How many men have you brought? he asked the man behind the table.It ' s me who ' ll ask the questions, the jowly man replied . You ' ve been charged with oathbreaking, cowardice, and desertion, Jon Snow . Do you deny that you abandoned your brothers to die on the Fist of the First Men and joined the wildling Mance Rayder, this self-styled King-beyond-the-Wall?Abandoned . . .? Jon almost choked on the word.Maester Aemon spoke up then . My lord, Donal Noye and I discussed these issues when Jon Snow first returned to us, and were satisfied by Jon ' s explanations.Well, I am not satisfied, Maester, said the jowly man . I will hear these explanations for myself . Yes I will!Jon swallowed his anger . [BOS] I abandoned no one . I left the Fist with Qhorin Halfhand to scout the Skirling Pass . I joined the wildlings under orders . The Halfhand feared that Mance might have found the Horn of Winter . . . [EOS] The Horn of Winter? Ser Alliser chuckled . Were you commanded to count their snarks as well, Lord Snow?No, but I counted their giants as best I could.Ser, snapped the jowly man . You will address Ser Alliser as ser, and myself as m ' lord . I am Janos Slynt, Lord of Harrenhal, and commander here at Castle Black until such time as Bowen Marsh returns with his garrison . You will grant us our courtesies, yes . I will not suffer to hear an anointed knight like the good Ser Alliser mocked by a traitor ' s bastard . He raised a hand and pointed a meaty finger at Jon ' s face . Do you deny that you took a wildling woman into your bed?No . Jon ' s grief over Ygritte was too fresh for him to deny her now . No, my lord.I suppose it was also the Halfhand who commanded you to fuck this unwashed whore? Ser Alliser asked with a smirk.Ser . She was no whore, ser . The Halfhand told me not to balk, whatever the wildlings asked of me, but . . . I will not deny that I went beyond what I had to do, that I . . . cared for her.You admit to being an oathbreaker, then, said Janos Slynt.Half the men at Castle Black visited Mole ' s Town from time to time to dig for buried treasures in the brothel, Jon knew, but he would not dishonor Ygritte by equating her with the Mole ' s Town whores . I broke my vows with a woman . I admit that . Yes.Yes, m ' lord! When Slynt scowled, his jowls quivered . He was as broad as the Old Bear had been, and no doubt would be as bald if he lived to Mormont ' s age . Half his hair was gone already, though he could not have been more than forty.Jon said . [BOS] Yes, my lord, I rode with the wildlings and ate with them, as the Halfhand commanded me, and I shared my furs with Ygritte . But I swear to you, I never turned my cloak . I escaped the Magnar as soon as I could, and never took up arms against my brothers or the realm . [EOS] Lord Slynt ' s small eyes studied him . Ser Glendon, he commanded, bring in the other prisoner.Ser Glendon was the tall man who had dragged Jon from his bed . Four other men went with him when he left the room, but they were back soon enough with a captive, a small, sallow, battered man fettered hand and foot . He had a single eyebrow, a widow ' s peak, and a mustache that looked like a smear of dirt on his upper lip, but his face was swollen and mottled with bruises, and most of his front teeth had been knocked out.The Eastwatch men threw the captive roughly to the floor . Lord Slynt frowned down at him . Is this the one you spoke of?The captive blinked yellow eyes . Aye . Not until that instant did Jon recognize Rattleshirt . He is a different man without his armor, he thought . Aye, the wildling repeated, he ' s the craven killed the Halfhand . Up in the Frostfangs, it were, after we hunted down t ' other crows and killed them, every one . We would have done for this one too, only he begged f ' his worthless life, offered t ' join us if we ' d have him . The Halfhand swore he ' d see the craven dead first, but the wolf ripped Qhorin half t ' pieces and this one opened his throat . He gave Jon a cracktooth smile then, and spat blood on his foot.Well? Janos Slynt demanded of Jon harshly . Do you deny it? Or will you claim Qhorin commanded you to kill him?He told me . . . The words came hard . He told me to do whatever they asked of me.Slynt looked about the solar, at the other Eastwatch men . Does this boy think I fell off a turnip wagon onto my head?Your lies won ' t save you now, Lord Snow, warned Ser Alliser Thorne . We ' ll have the truth from you, bastard.I ' ve told you the truth . Our garrons were failing, and Rattleshirt was close behind us . Qhorin told me to pretend to join the wildlings . ‘ You must not balk, whatever is asked of you, ' he said . He knew they would make me kill him . Rattleshirt was going to kill him anyway, he knew that too.So now you claim the great Qhorin Halfhand feared this creature? Slynt looked at Rattleshirt, and snorted.All men fear the Lord o ' Bones, the wildling grumbled . Ser Glendon kicked him, and he lapsed back into silence.Jon insisted . [BOS] I never said that, [EOS] Slynt slammed a fist on the table . I heard you! Ser Alliser had your measure true enough, it seems . You lie through your bastard ' s teeth . Well, I will not suffer it . I will not! You might have fooled this crippled blacksmith, but not Janos Slynt! Oh, no . Janos Slynt does not swallow lies so easily . Did you think my skull was stuffed with cabbage?I don ' t know what your skull is stuffed with . My lord.Lord Snow is nothing if not arrogant, said Ser Alliser . He murdered Qhorin just as his fellow turncloaks did Lord Mormont . It would not surprise me to learn that it was all part of the same fell plot . Benjen Stark may well have a hand in all this as well . For all we know, he is sitting in Mance Rayder ' s tent even now . You know these Starks, my lord.I do, said Janos Slynt . I know them too well.Jon peeled off his glove and showed them his burned hand . [BOS] I burned my hand defending Lord Mormont from a wight . And my uncle was a man of honor . He would never have betrayed his vows . [EOS] No more than you? mocked Ser Alliser.Septon Cellador cleared his throat . Lord Slynt, he said, this boy refused to swear his vows properly in the sept, but went beyond the Wall to say his words before a heart tree . His father ' s gods, he said, but they are wildling gods as well.They are the gods of the north, Septon . Maester Aemon was courteous, but firm . My lords, when Donal Noye was slain, it was this young man Jon Snow who took the Wall and held it, against all the fury of the north . He has proved himself valiant, loyal, and resourceful . Were it not for him, you would have found Mance Rayder sitting here when you arrived, Lord Slynt . You are doing him a great wrong . Jon Snow was Lord Mormont ' s own steward and squire . He was chosen for that duty because the Lord Commander saw much promise in him . As do I.Promise? said Slynt . Well, promise may turn false . Qhorin Halfhand ' s blood is on his hands . Mormont trusted him, you say, but what of that? I know what it is to be betrayed by men you trusted . Oh, yes . And I know the ways of wolves as well . He pointed at Jon ' s face . Your father died a traitor.My father was murdered . Jon was past caring what they did to him, but he would not suffer any more lies about his father.Slynt purpled . Murder? You insolent pup . King Robert was not even cold when Lord Eddard moved against his son . He rose to his feet; a shorter man than Mormont, but thick about the chest and arms, with a gut to match . A small gold spear tipped with red enamel pinned his cloak at the shoulder . Your father died by the sword, but he was highborn, a King ' s Hand . For you, a noose will serve . Ser Alliser, take this turncloak to an ice cell.My lord is wise . Ser Alliser seized Jon by the arm.Jon yanked away and grabbed the knight by the throat with such ferocity that he lifted him off the floor . He would have throttled him if the Eastwatch men had not pulled him off . Thorne staggered back, rubbing the marks Jon ' s fingers had left on his neck . [BOS] You see for yourselves, brothers . The boy is a wildling . [EOS] The wind was blowing wild from the east, so strong the heavy cage would rock whenever a gust got it in its teeth . It skirled along the Wall, shivering off the ice, making Jon ' s cloak flap against the bars . The sky was slate grey, the sun no more than a faint patch of brightness behind the clouds . Across the killing ground, he could see the glimmer of a thousand campfires burning, but their lights seemed small and powerless against such gloom and cold.A grim day . Jon Snow wrapped gloved hands around the bars and held tight as the wind hammered at the cage once more . When he looked straight down past his feet, the ground was lost in shadow, as if he were being lowered into some bottomless pit . Well, death is a bottomless pit of sorts, he reflected, and when this day ' s work is done my name will be shadowed forever.Bastard children were born from lust and lies, men said; their nature was wanton and treacherous . Once Jon had meant to prove them wrong, to show his lord father that he could be as good and true a son as Robb . I made a botch of that . Robb had become a hero king; if Jon was remembered at all, it would be as a turncloak, an oathbreaker, and a murderer . He was glad that Lord Eddard was not alive to see his shame.I should have stayed in that cave with Ygritte . If there was a life beyond this one, he hoped to tell her that . She will claw my face the way the eagle did, and curse me for a coward, but I ' ll tell her all the same . He flexed his sword hand, as Maester Aemon had taught him . The habit had become part of him, and he would need his fingers to be limber to have even half a chance of murdering Mance Rayder.They had pulled him out this morning, after four days in the ice, locked up in a cell five by five by five, too low for him to stand, too tight for him to stretch out on his back . The stewards had long ago discovered that food and meat kept longer in the icy storerooms carved from the base of the Wall . . . but prisoners did not . You will die in here, Lord Snow, Ser Alliser had said just before he closed the heavy wooden door, and Jon had believed it . But this morning they had come and pulled him out again, and marched him cramped and shivering back to the King ' s Tower, to stand before jowly Janos Slynt once moreThat old maester says I cannot hang you, Slynt declared . He has written Cotter Pyke, and even had the bloody gall to show me the letter . He says you are no turncloak.Aemon ' s lived too long, my lord, Ser Alliser assured him . His wits have gone dark as his eyes.Aye, Slynt said . A blind man with a chain about his neck, who does he think he is?Aemon Targaryen, Jon thought, a king ' s son and a king ' s brother and a king who might have been . But he said nothing.Still, Slynt said, I will not have it said that Janos Slynt hanged a man unjustly . I will not . I have decided to give you one last chance to prove you are as loyal as you claim, Lord Snow . One last chance to do your duty, yes! He stood . Mance Rayder wants to parley with us . He knows he has no chance now that Janos Slynt has come, so he wants to talk, this King-beyond-the-Wall . But the man is craven, and will not come to us . No doubt he knows I ' d hang him . Hang him by his feet from the top of the Wall, on a rope two hundred feet long! But he will not come . He asks that we send an envoy to him.We ' re sending you, Lord Snow . Ser Alliser smiled.Me . Jon ' s voice was flat . Why me?You rode with these wildlings, said Thorne . Mance Rayder knows you . He will be more inclined to trust you.That was so wrong Jon might have laughed . You ' ve got it backward . Mance suspected me from the first . If I show up in his camp wearing a black cloak again and speaking for the Night ' s Watch, he ' ll know that I betrayed him.He asked for an envoy, we are sending one, said Slynt . If you are too craven to face this turncloak king, we can return you to your ice cell . This time without the furs, I think . Yes.No need for that, my lord, said Ser Alliser . Lord Snow will do as we ask . He wants to show us that he is no turncloak . He wants to prove himself a loyal man of the Night ' s Watch.Thorne was much the more clever of the two, Jon realized; this had his stink all over it . He was trapped . I ' ll go, he said in a clipped, curt voice.M ' lord, Janos Slynt reminded him . You ' ll address me—I ' ll go, my lord . But you are making a mistake, my lord . You are sending the wrong man, my lord . Just the sight of me is going to anger Mance . My lord would have a better chance of reaching terms if he sent—Terms? Ser Alliser chuckled.Janos Slynt does not make terms with lawless savages, Lord Snow . No, he does not.We ' re not sending you to talk with Mance Rayder, Ser Alliser said . We ' re sending you to kill him.The wind whistled through the bars, and Jon Snow shivered . His leg was throbbing, and his head . He was not fit to kill a kitten, yet here he was . The trap had teeth . With Maester Aemon insisting on Jon ' s innocence, Lord Janos had not dared to leave him in the ice to die . This was better . Our honor means no more than our lives, so long as the realm is safe, Qhorin Halfhand had said in the Frostfangs . He must remember that . Whether he slew Mance or only tried and failed, the free folk would kill him . Even desertion was impossible, if he ' d been so inclined; to Mance he was a proven liar and betrayer.When the cage jerked to a halt, Jon swung down onto the ground and rattled Longclaw ' s hilt to loosen the bastard blade in its scabbard . The gate was a few yards to his left, still blocked by the splintered ruins of the turtle, the carcass of a mammoth ripening within . There were other corpses too, strewn amidst broken barrels, hardened pitch, and patches of burnt grass, all shadowed by the Wall . Jon had no wish to linger here . He started walking toward the wildling camp, past the body of a dead giant whose head had been crushed by a stone . A raven was pulling out bits of brain from the giant ' s shattered skull . It looked up as he walked by . Snow, it screamed at him . Snow, snow . Then it opened its wings and flew away.No sooner had he started out than a lone rider emerged from the wildling camp and came toward him . He wondered if Mance was coming out to parley in no-man ' s-land . That might make it easier, though nothing will make it easy . But as the distance between them diminished Jon saw that the horseman was short and broad, with gold rings glinting on thick arms and a white beard spreading out across his massive chest.Har! Tormund boomed when they came together . Jon Snow the crow . I feared we ' d seen the last o ' you.I never knew you feared anything, Tormund.That made the wildling grin . Well said, lad . I see your cloak is black . Mance won ' t like that . If you ' ve come to change sides again, best climb back on that Wall o ' yours.They ' ve sent me to treat with the King-beyond-the-Wall.Treat? Tormund laughed . Now there ' s a word . Har! Mance wants to talk, that ' s true enough . Can ' t say he ' d want to talk with you, though.I ' m the one they ' ve sent.I see that . Best come along, then . You want to ride?I can walk.You fought us hard here . Tormund turned his garron back toward the wildling camp . You and your brothers . I give you that . Two hundred dead, and a dozen giants . Mag himself went in that gate o ' yours and never did come out.He died on the sword of a brave man named Donal Noye.Aye? Some great lord was he, this Donal Noye? One of your shiny knights in their steel smallclothes?A blacksmith . He only had one arm.A one-armed smith slew Mag the Mighty? Har! That must o ' been a fight to see . Mance will make a song of it, see if he don ' t. Tormund took a waterskin off his saddle and pulled the cork . This will warm us some . To Donal Noye, and Mag the Mighty . He took a swing, and handed it down to Jon.To Donal Noye, and Mag the Mighty . The skin was full of mead, but a mead so potent that it made Jon ' s eyes water and sent tendrils of fire snaking through his chest . After the ice cell and the cold ride down in the cage, the warmth was welcome.Tormund took the skin back and downed another swig, then wiped his mouth . The Magnar of Thenn swore t ' us that he ' d have the gate wide open, so all we ' d need to do was stroll through singing . He was going to bring the whole Wall down.Jon said . [BOS] He brought down part, On his head . [EOS] Har! said Tormund . Well, I never had much use for Styr . When a man ' s got no beard nor hair nor ears, you can ' t get a good grip on him when you fight . He kept his horse at a slow walk so Jon could limp beside him . What happened to that leg?An arrow . One of Ygritte ' s, I think.That ' s a woman for you . One day she ' s kissing you, the next she ' s filling you with arrows.She ' s dead.Aye? Tormund gave a sad shake of the head . A waste . If I ' d been ten years younger, I ' d have stolen her meself . That hair she had . Well, the hottest fires burn out quickest . He lifted the skin of mead . To Ygritte, kissed by fire! He drank deep.Jon repeated when Tormund handed him back the skin . He drank even deeper . [BOS] To Ygritte, kissed by fire, [EOS] Was it you killed her?My brother . Jon had never learned which one, and hoped he never would.You bloody crows . Tormund ' s tone was gruff, yet strangely gentle . That Longspear stole me daughter . Munda, me little autumn apple . Took her right out o ' my tent with all four o ' her brothers about . Toregg slept through it, the great lout, and Torwynd . . . well, Torwynd the Tame, that says all that needs saying, don ' t it? The young ones gave the lad a fight, though.And Munda? asked Jon.She ' s my own blood, said Tormund proudly . She broke his lip for him and bit one ear half off, and I hear he ' s got so many scratches on his back he can ' t wear a cloak . She likes him well enough, though . And why not? He don ' t fight with no spear, you know . Never has . So where do you think he got that name? Har!Jon had to laugh . Even now, even here . Ygritte had been fond of Longspear Ryk . He hoped he found some joy with Tormund ' s Munda . Someone needed to find some joy somewhere.You know nothing, Jon Snow, Ygritte would have told him . I know that I am going to die, he thought . I know that much, at least . All men die, he could almost hear her say, and women too, and every beast that flies or swims or runs . It ' s not the when o ' dying that matters, it ' s the how of it, Jon Snow . Easy for you to say, he thought back . You died brave in battle, storming the castle of a foe . I ' m going to die a turncloak and a killer . Nor would his death be quick, unless it came on the end of Mance ' s sword.Soon they were among the tents . It was the usual wildling camp; a sprawling jumble of cookfires and piss pits, children and goats wandering freely, sheep bleating among the trees, horse hides pegged up to dry . There was no plan to it, no order, no defenses . But there were men and women and animals everywhere.Many ignored him, but for every one who went about his business there were ten who stopped to stare; children squatting by the fires, old women in dog carts, cave dwellers with painted faces, raiders with claws and snakes and severed heads painted on their shields, all turned to have a look . Jon saw spearwives too, their long hair streaming in the piney wind that sighed between the trees.There were no true hills here, but Mance Rayder ' s white fur tent had been raised on a spot of high stony ground right on the edge of the trees . The King-beyond-the-Wall was waiting outside, his ragged red-and-black cloak blowing in the wind . Harma Dogshead was with him, Jon saw, back from her raids and feints along the Wall, and Varamyr Sixskins as well, attended by his shadowcat and two lean grey wolves.When they saw who the Watch had sent, Harma turned her head and spat, and one of Varamyr ' s wolves bared its teeth and growled . You must be very brave or very stupid, Jon Snow, Mance Rayder said, to come back to us wearing a black cloak.What else would a man of the Night ' s Watch wear?Kill him, urged Harma . Send his body back up in that cage o ' theirs and tell them to send us someone else . I ' ll keep his head for my standard . A turncloak ' s worse than a dog.I warned you he was false . Varamyr ' s tone was mild, but his shadow-cat was staring at Jon hungrily through slitted grey eyes . I never did like the smell o ' him.Pull in your claws, beastling . Tormund Giantsbane swung down off his horse . The lad ' s here to hear . You lay a paw on him, might be I ' ll take me that shadowskin cloak I been wanting.Tormund Crowlover, Harma sneered . You are a great sack o ' wind, old man.The skinchanger was grey-faced, round-shouldered, and bald, a mouse of a man with a wolfling ' s eyes . Once a horse is broken to the saddle, any man can mount him, he said in a soft voice . Once a beast ' s been joined to a man, any skinchanger can slip inside and ride him . Orell was withering inside his feathers, so I took the eagle for my own . But the joining works both ways, warg . Orell lives inside me now, whispering how much he hates you . And I can soar above the Wall, and see with eagle eyes.So we know, said Mance . We know how few you were, when you stopped the turtle . We know how many came from Eastwatch . We know how your supplies have dwindled . Pitch, oil, arrows, spears . Even your stair is gone, and that cage can only lift so many . We know . And now you know we know . He opened the flap of the tent . Come inside . The rest of you, wait here.What, even me? said Tormund.Particularly you . Always.It was warm within . A small fire burned beneath the smoke holes, and a brazier smouldered near the pile of furs where Dalla lay, pale and sweating . Her sister was holding her hand . Val, Jon remembered . I was sorry when Jarl fell, he told her.Val looked at him with pale grey eyes . He always climbed too fast . She was as fair as he ' d remembered, slender, full-breasted, graceful even at rest, with high sharp cheekbones and a thick braid of honey-colored hair that fell to her waist.Dalla ' s time is near, Mance explained . She and Val will stay . They know what I mean to say.Jon kept his face as still as ice . Foul enough to slay a man in his own tent under truce . Must I murder him in front of his wife as their child is being born? He closed the fingers of his sword hand . Mance was not wearing armor, but his own sword was sheathed on his left hip . And there were other weapons in the tent, daggers and dirks, a bow and a quiver of arrows, a bronze-headed spear lying beside that big black . . .. . . horn.Jon sucked in his breath.A warhorn, a bloody great warhorn.Yes, Mance said . The Horn of Winter, that Joramun once blew to wake giants from the earth.The horn was huge, eight feet along the curve and so wide at the mouth that he could have put his arm inside up to the elbow . If this came from an aurochs, it was the biggest that ever lived . At first he thought the bands around it were bronze, but when he moved closer he realized they were gold . Old gold, more brown than yellow, and graven with runes.Ygritte said you never found the horn.Did you think only crows could lie? I liked you well enough, for a bastard . . . but I never trusted you . A man needs to earn my trust.Jon faced him . [BOS] If you ' ve had the Horn of Joramun all along, why haven ' t you used it? Why bother building turtles and sending Thenns to kill us in our beds? If this horn is all the songs say, why not just sound it and be done? [EOS] It was Dalla who answered him, Dalla great with child, lying on her pile of furs beside the brazier . We free folk know things you kneelers have forgotten . Sometimes the short road is not the safest, Jon Snow . The Horned Lord once said that sorcery is a sword without a hilt . There is no safe way to grasp it.Mance ran a hand along the curve of the great horn . No man goes hunting with only one arrow in his quiver, he said . I had hoped that Styr and Jarl would take your brothers unawares, and open the gate for us . I drew your garrison away with feints and raids and secondary attacks . Bowen Marsh swallowed that lure as I knew he would, but your band of cripples and orphans proved to be more stubborn than anticipated . Don ' t think you ' ve stopped us, though . The truth is, you are too few and we are too many . I could continue the attack here and still send ten thousand men to cross the Bay of Seals on rafts and take Eastwatch from the rear . I could storm the Shadow Tower too, I know the approaches as well as any man alive . I could send men and mammoths to dig out the gates at the castles you ' ve abandoned, all of them at once.Why don ' t you, then? Jon could have drawn Longclaw then, but he wanted to hear what the wildling had to say.Blood, said Mance Rayder . I ' d win in the end, yes, but you ' d bleed me, and my people have bled enough.Your losses haven ' t been that heavy.Not at your hands . Mance studied Jon ' s face . You saw the Fist of the First Men . You know what happened there . You know what we are facing.The Others . . .They grow stronger as the days grow shorter and the nights colder . First they kill you, then they send your dead against you . The giants have not been able to stand against them, nor the Thenns, the ice river clans, the Hornfoots.Nor you?Nor me . There was anger in that admission, and bitterness too deep for words . Raymun Redbeard, Bael the Bard, Gendel and Gorne, the Horned Lord, they all came south to conquer, but I ' ve come with my tail between my legs to hide behind your Wall . He touched the horn again . If I sound the Horn of Winter, the Wall will fall . Or so the songs would have me believe . There are those among my people who want nothing more . . .But once the Wall is fallen, Dalla said, what will stop the Others?Mance gave her a fond smile . It ' s a wise woman I ' ve found . A true queen . He turned back to Jon . Go back and tell them to open their gate and let us pass . If they do, I will give them the horn, and the Wall will stand until the end of days.Open the gate and let them pass . Easy to say, but what must follow? Giants camping in the ruins of Winterfell? Cannibals in the wolfswood, chariots sweeping across the barrowlands, free folk stealing the daughters of shipwrights and silversmiths from White Harbor and fishwives off the Stony Shore? Jon asked suddenly . [BOS] Are you a true king? [EOS] I ' ve never had a crown on my head or sat my arse on a bloody throne, if that ' s what you ' re asking, Mance replied . My birth is as low as a man ' s can get, no septon ' s ever smeared my head with oils, I don ' t own any castles, and my queen wears furs and amber, not silk and sapphires . I am my own champion, my own fool, and my own harpist . You don ' t become King-beyond-the-Wall because your father was . The free folk won ' t follow a name, and they don ' t care which brother was born first . They follow fighters . When I left the Shadow Tower there were five men making noises about how they might be the stuff of kings . Tormund was one, the Magnar another . The other three I slew, when they made it plain they ' d sooner fight than follow.Jon said bluntly, [BOS] You can kill your enemies, but can you rule your friends? If we let your people pass, are you strong enough to make them keep the king ' s peace and obey the laws? [EOS] Whose laws? The laws of Winterfell and King ' s Landing? Mance laughed . When we want laws we ' ll make our own . You can keep your king ' s justice too, and your king ' s taxes . I ' m offering you the horn, not our freedom . We will not kneel to you.What if we refuse the offer? Jon had no doubt that they would . The Old Bear might at least have listened, though he would have balked at the notion of letting thirty or forty thousand wildlings loose on the Seven Kingdoms . But Alliser Thorne and Janos Slynt would dismiss the notion out of hand.If you refuse, Mance Rayder said, Tormund Giantsbane will sound the Horn of Winter three days hence, at dawn.He could carry the message back to Castle Black and tell them of the horn, but if he left Mance still alive Lord Janos and Ser Alliser would seize on that as proof that he was a turncloak . A thousand thoughts flickered through Jon ' s head . If I can destroy the horn, smash it here and now . . . but before he could begin to think that through, he heard the low moan of some other horn, made faint by the tent ' s hide walls . Mance heard it too . Frowning, he went to the door . Jon followed.The warhorn was louder outside . Its call had stirred the wildling camp . Three Hornfoot men jogged past, carrying long spears . Horses were whinnying and snorting, giants roaring in the Old Tongue, and even the mammoths were restless.Outrider ' s horn, Tormund told Mance.Something ' s coming . Varamyr sat crosslegged on the half-frozen ground, his wolves circled restlessly around him . A shadow swept over him, and Jon looked up to see the eagle ' s blue-grey wings . Coming, from the east.When the dead walk, walls and stakes and swords mean nothing, he remembered . You cannot fight the dead, Jon Snow . No man knows that half so well as me.Harma scowled . East? The wights should be behind us.East, the skinchanger repeated . Something ' s coming.Jon asked . [BOS] The Others? [EOS] Mance shook his head . The Others never come when the sun is up . Chariots were rattling across the killing ground, jammed with riders waving spears of sharpened bone . The king groaned . Where the bloody hell do they think they ' re going? Quenn, get those fools back where they belong . Someone bring my horse . The mare, not the stallion . I ' ll want my armor too . Mance glanced suspiciously at the Wall . Atop the icy parapets, the straw soldiers stood collecting arrows, but there was no sign of any other activity . Harma, mount up your raiders . Tormund, find your sons and give me a triple line of spears.Aye, said Tormund, striding off.The mousy little skinchanger closed his eyes and said, I see them . They ' re coming along the streams and game trails . . .Men . Men on horses . Men in steel and men in black.Crows . Mance made the word a curse . He turned on Jon . Did my old brothers think they ' d catch me with my breeches down if they attacked while we were talking?If they planned an attack they never told me about it . Jon did not believe it . Lord Janos lacked the men to attack the wildling camp . Besides, he was on the wrong side of the Wall, and the gate was sealed with rubble . He had a different sort of treachery in mind, this can ' t be his work.If you ' re lying to me again, you won ' t be leaving here alive, Mance warned . His guards brought him his horse and armor . Elsewhere around the camp, Jon saw people running at cross purposes, some men forming up as if to storm the Wall while others slipped into the woods, women driving dog carts east, mammoths wandering west . He reached back over his shoulder and drew Longclaw just as a thin line of rangers emerged from the fringes of the wood three hundred yards away . They wore black mail, black halfhelms, and black cloaks . Half-armored, Mance drew his sword . You knew nothing of this, did you? he said to Jon, coldly.Slow as honey on a cold morning, the rangers swept down on the wildling camp, picking their way through clumps of gorse and stands of trees, over roots and rocks . Wildlings flew to meet them, shouting war cries and waving clubs and bronze swords and axes made of flint, galloping headlong at their ancient enemies . A shout, a slash, and a fine brave death, Jon had heard brothers say of the free folk ' s way of fighting.Jon told the King-beyond-the-Wall, [BOS] Believe what you will, but I knew nothing of any attack . [EOS] Harma thundered past before Mance could reply, riding at the head of thirty raiders . Her standard went before her; a dead dog impaled on a spear, raining blood at every stride . Mance watched as she smashed into the rangers . Might be you ' re telling it true, he said . Those look like Eastwatch men . Sailors on horses . Cotter Pyke always had more guts than sense . He took the Lord of Bones at Long Barrow, he might have thought to do the same with me . If so, he ' s a fool . He doesn ' t have the men, he—Mance! the shout came . It was a scout, bursting from the trees on a lathered horse . Mance, there ' s more, they ' re all around us, iron men, iron, a host of iron men.Cursing, Mance swung up into the saddle . Varamyr, stay and see that no harm comes to Dalla . The King-beyond-the-Wall pointed his sword at Jon . And keep a few extra eyes on this crow . If he runs, rip out his throat.Aye, I ' ll do that . The skinchanger was a head shorter than Jon, slumped and soft, but that shadowcat could disembowel him with one paw . They ' re coming from the north too, Varamyr told Mance . You best go.Mance donned his helm with its raven wings . His men were mounted up as well . Arrowhead, Mance snapped, to me, form wedge . Yet when he slammed his heels into the mare and flew across the field at the rangers, the men who raced to catch him lost all semblance of formation.Jon took a step toward the tent, thinking of the Horn of Winter, but the shadowcat blocked him, tail lashing . The beast ' s nostrils flared, and slaver ran from his curved front teeth . He smells my fear . He missed Ghost more than ever then . The two wolves were behind him, growling.Banners, he heard Varamyr murmur, I see golden banners, oh . . . A mammoth lumbered by, trumpeting, a half-dozen bowmen in the wooden tower on its back . The king . . . no . . .Then the skinchanger threw back his head and screamed.The sound was shocking, ear-piercing, thick with agony . Varamyr fell, writhing, and the ' cat was screaming too . . . and high, high in the eastern sky, against the wall of cloud, Jon saw the eagle burning . For a heartbeat it flamed brighter than a star, wreathed in red and gold and orange, its wings beating wildly at the air as if it could fly from the pain . Higher it flew, and higher, and higher still.The scream brought Val out of the tent, white-faced . What is it, what ' s happened? Varamyr ' s wolves were fighting each other, and the shadowcat had raced off into the trees, but the man was still twisting on the ground . What ' s wrong with him? Val demanded, horrified . Where ' s Mance?Jon pointed . [BOS] There . Gone to fight . [EOS] The king led his ragged wedge into a knot of rangers, his sword flashing.Gone? He can ' t be gone, not now . It ' s started.The battle? He watched the rangers scatter before Harma ' s bloody dog ' s head . The raiders screamed and hacked and chased the men in black back into the trees . But there were more men coming from the wood, a column of horse . Knights on heavy horse, Jon saw . Harma had to regroup and wheel to meet them, but half of her men had raced too far ahead.The birth! Val was shouting at him.Trumpets were blowing all around, loud and brazen . The wildlings have no trumpets, only warhorns . They knew that as well as he did; the sound sent free folk running in confusion, some toward the fighting, others away . A mammoth was stomping through a flock of sheep that three men were trying to herd off west . The drums were beating as the wildlings ran to form squares and lines, but they were too late, too disorganized, too slow . The enemy was emerging from the forest, from the east, the northeast, the north; three great columns of heavy horse, all dark glinting steel and bright wool surcoats . Not the men of Eastwatch, those had been no more than a line of scouts . An army . The king? Jon was as confused as the wildlings . Could Robb have returned? Had the boy on the Iron Throne finally bestirred himself? You best get back inside the tent, he told Val.Across the field one column had washed over Harma Dogshead . Another smashed into the flank of Tormund ' s spearmen as he and his sons desperately tried to turn them . The giants were climbing onto their mammoths, though, and the knights on their barded horses did not like that at all; he could see how the coursers and destriers screamed and scattered at the sight of those lumbering mountains . But there was fear on the wildling side as well, hundreds of women and children rushing away from the battle, some of them blundering right under the hooves of garrons . He saw an old woman ' s dog cart veer into the path of three chariots, to send them crashing into each other.Gods, Val whispered, gods, why are they doing this?Go inside the tent and stay with Dalla . It ' s not safe out here . It wouldn ' t be a great deal safer inside, but she didn ' t need to hear that.I need to find the midwife, Val said.You ' re the midwife . I ' ll stay here until Mance comes back . He had lost sight of Mance but now he found him again, cutting his way through a knot of mounted men . The mammoths had shattered the center column, but the other two were closing like pincers . On the eastern edge of the camps, some archers were loosing fire arrows at the tents . He saw a mammoth pluck a knight from his saddle and fling him forty feet with a flick of its trunk . Wildlings streamed past, women and children running from the battle, some with men hurrying them along . A few of them gave Jon dark looks but Longclaw was in his hand, and no one troubled him . Even Varamyr fled, crawling off on his hands and knees.More and more men were pouring from the trees, not only knights now but freeriders and mounted bowmen and men-at-arms in jacks and kettle helms, dozens of men, hundreds of men . A blaze of banners flew above them . The wind was whipping them too wildly for Jon to see the sigils, but he glimpsed a seahorse, a field of birds, a ring of flowers . And yellow, so much yellow, yellow banners with a red device, whose arms were those?East and north and northeast, he saw bands of wildlings trying to stand and fight, but the attackers rode right over them . The free folk still had the numbers, but the attackers had steel armor and heavy horses . In the thickest part of the fray, Jon saw Mance standing tall in his stirrups . His red-and-black cloak and raven-winged helm made him easy to pick out . He had his sword raised and men were rallying to him when a wedge of knights smashed into them with lance and sword and longaxe . Mance ' s mare went up on her hind legs, kicking, and a spear took her through the breast . Then the steel tide washed over him.It ' s done, Jon thought, they ' re breaking . The wildlings were running, throwing down their weapons, Hornfoot men and cave dwellers and Thenns in bronze scales, they were running . Mance was gone, someone was waving Harma ' s head on a pole, Tormund ' s lines had broken . Only the giants on their mammoths were holding, hairy islands in a red steel sea . The fires were leaping from tent to tent and some of the tall pines were going up as well . And through the smoke another wedge of armored riders came, on barded horses . Floating above them were the largest banners yet, royal standards as big as sheets; a yellow one with long pointed tongues that showed a flaming heart, and another like a sheet of beaten gold, with a black stag prancing and rippling in the wind.Robert, Jon thought for one mad moment, remembering poor Owen, but when the trumpets blew again and the knights charged, the name they cried was Stannis! Stannis! STANNIS!Jon turned away, and went inside the tent.Jon prowled around Satin in a slow circle, sword in hand, forcing him to turn . [BOS] Get your shield up, [EOS] he said.It ' s too heavy, the Oldtown boy complained.It ' s as heavy as it needs to be to stop a sword, Jon said . Now get it up . He stepped forward, slashing . Satin jerked the shield up in time to catch the sword on its rim, and swung his own blade at Jon ' s ribs . Good, Jon said, when he felt the impact on his own shield . That was good . But you need to put your body into it . Get your weight behind the steel and you ' ll do more damage than with arm strength alone . Come, try it again, drive at me, but keep the shield up or I ' ll ring your head like a bell . . .Instead Satin took a step backward and raised his visor . Jon, he said, in an anxious voice.When he turned, she was standing behind him, with half a dozen queen ' s men around her . Small wonder the yard grew so quiet . He had glimpsed Melisandre at her nightfires, and coming and going about the castle, but never so close . She ' s beautiful, he thought . . . but there was something more than a little unsettling about red eyes . My lady.The king would speak with you, Jon Snow.Jon thrust the practice sword into the earth . [BOS] Might I be allowed to change? I am in no fit state to stand before a king . [EOS] We shall await you atop the Wall, said Melisandre . We, Jon heard, not he . It ' s as they say . This is his true queen, not the one he left at Eastwatch.He hung his mail and plate inside the armory, returned to his own cell, discarded his sweat-stained clothes, and donned a fresh set of blacks . It would be cold and windy in the cage, he knew, and colder and windier still on top of the ice, so he chose a heavy hooded cloak . Last of all he collected Longclaw, and slung the bastard sword across his back.Melisandre was waiting for him at the base of the Wall . She had sent her queen ' s men away . Jon asked her as they entered the cage . [BOS] What does His Grace want of me? [EOS] All you have to give, Jon Snow . He is a king.He shut the door and pulled the bell cord . The winch began to turn . They rose . The day was bright and the Wall was weeping, long fingers of water trickling down its face and glinting in the sun . In the close confines of the iron cage, he was acutely aware of the red woman ' s presence . She even smells red . The scent reminded him of Mikken ' s forge, of the way iron smelled when red-hot; the scent was smoke and blood . Kissed by fire, he thought, remembering Ygritte . The wind got in amongst Melisandre ' s long red robes and sent them flapping against Jon ' s legs as he stood beside her . You are not cold, my lady? he asked her.She laughed . Never . The ruby at her throat seemed to pulse, in time with the beating of her heart . The Lord ' s fire lives within me, Jon Snow . Feel . She put her hand on his cheek, and held it there while he felt how warm she was . That is how life should feel, she told him . Only death is cold.They found Stannis Baratheon standing alone at the edge of the Wall, brooding over the field where he had won his battle, and the great green forest beyond . He was dressed in the same black breeches, tunic, and boots that a brother of the Night ' s Watch might wear . Only his cloak set him apart; a heavy golden cloak trimmed in black fur, and pinned with a brooch in the shape of a flaming heart . I have brought you the Bastard of Winterfell, Your Grace, said Melisandre.Stannis turned to study him . Beneath his heavy brow were eyes like bottomless blue pools . His hollow cheeks and strong jaw were covered with a short-cropped blue-black beard that did little to conceal the gauntness of his face, and his teeth were clenched . His neck and shoulders were clenched as well, and his right hand . Jon found himself remembering something Donal Noye once said about the Baratheon brothers . Robert was the true steel . Stannis is pure iron, black and hard and strong, but brittle, the way iron gets . He ' ll break before he bends . Uneasily, he knelt, wondering why this brittle king had need of him.Rise . I have heard much and more of you, Lord Snow.I am no lord, sire . Jon rose . I know what you have heard . That I am a turncloak, and craven . That I slew my brother Qhorin Halfhand so the wildlings would spare my life . That I rode with Mance Rayder, and took a wildling wife.Aye . All that, and more . You are a warg too, they say, a skinchanger who walks at night as a wolf . King Stannis had a hard smile . How much of it is true?I had a direwolf, Ghost . I left him when I climbed the Wall near Greyguard, and have not seen him since . Qhorin Halfhand commanded me to join the wildlings . He knew they would make me kill him to prove myself, and told me to do whatever they asked of me . The woman was named Ygritte . I broke my vows with her, but I swear to you on my father ' s name that I never turned my cloak.I believe you, the king said.That startled him . Why?Stannis snorted . I know Janos Slynt . And I knew Ned Stark as well . Your father was no friend of mine, but only a fool would doubt his honor or his honesty . You have his look . A big man, Stannis Baratheon towered over Jon, but he was so gaunt that he looked ten years older than he was . I know more than you might think, Jon Snow . I know it was you who found the dragonglass dagger that Randyll Tarly ' s son used to slay the Other.Ghost found it . The blade was wrapped in a ranger ' s cloak and buried beneath the Fist of the First Men . There were other blades as well . . . spearheads, arrowheads, all dragonglass.I know you held the gate here, King Stannis said . If not, I would have come too late.Donal Noye held the gate . He died below in the tunnel, fighting the king of the giants.Stannis grimaced . Noye made my first sword for me, and Robert ' s warhammer as well . Had the god seen fit to spare him, he would have made a better Lord Commander for your order than any of these fools who are squabbling over it now.Jon said . [BOS] Cotter Pyke and Ser Denys Mallister are no fools, sire, They ' re good men, and capable . Othell Yarwyck as well, in his own way . Lord Mormont trusted each of them . [EOS] Your Lord Mormont trusted too easily . Else he would not have died as he did . But we were speaking of you . I have not forgotten that it was you who brought us this magic horn, and captured Mance Rayder ' s wife and son.Dalla died . Jon was saddened by that still . Val is her sister . She and the babe did not require much capturing, Your Grace . You had put the wildlings to flight, and the skinchanger Mance had left to guard his queen went mad when the eagle burned . Jon looked at Melisandre . Some say that was your doing.She smiled, her long copper hair tumbling across her face . The Lord of Light has fiery talons, Jon Snow.Jon nodded, and turned back to the king . [BOS] Your Grace, you spoke of Val . She has asked to see Mance Rayder, to bring his son to him . It would be a . . . a kindness . [EOS] The man is a deserter from your order . Your brothers are all insisting on his death . Why should I do him a kindness?Jon had no answer for that . [BOS] If not for him, for Val . For her sister ' s sake, the child ' s mother . [EOS] You are fond of this Val?I scarcely know her.They tell me she is comely.Jon admitted . [BOS] Very, [EOS] Beauty can be treacherous . My brother learned that lesson from Cersei Lannister . She murdered him, do not doubt it . Your father and Jon Arryn as well . He scowled . You rode with these wildlings . Is there any honor in them, do you think?Jon said, [BOS] Yes, but their own sort of honor, sire . [EOS] In Mance Rayder?Yes . I think so.In the Lord of Bones?Jon hesitated . [BOS] Rattleshirt, we called him . Treacherous and blood-thirsty . If there ' s honor in him, he hides it down beneath his suit of bones . [EOS] And this other man, this Tormund of the many names who eluded us after the battle? Answer me truly.Tormund Giantsbane seemed to me the sort of man who would make a good friend and a bad enemy, Your Grace.Stannis gave a curt nod . Your father was a man of honor . He was no friend to me, but I saw his worth . Your brother was a rebel and a traitor who meant to steal half my kingdom, but no man can question his courage . What of you?Does he want me to say I love him? Jon ' s voice was stiff and formal as he said, I am a man of the Night ' s Watch.Words . Words are wind . Why do you think I abandoned Dragonstone and sailed to the Wall, Lord Snow?I am no lord, sire . You came because we sent for you, I hope . Though I could not say why you took so long about it.Surprisingly, Stannis smiled at that . You ' re bold enough to be a Stark . Yes, I should have come sooner . If not for my Hand, I might not have come at all . Lord Seaworth is a man of humble birth, but he reminded me of my duty, when all I could think of was my rights . I had the cart before the horse, Davos said . I was trying to win the throne to save the kingdom, when I should have been trying to save the kingdom to win the throne . Stannis pointed north . There is where I ' ll find the foe that I was born to fight.His name may not be spoken, Melisandre added softly . He is the God of Night and Terror, Jon Snow, and these shapes in the snow are his creatures.They tell me that you slew one of these walking corpses to save Lord Mormont ' s life, Stannis said . It may be that this is your war as well, Lord Snow . If you will give me your help.My sword is pledged to the Night ' s Watch, Your Grace, Jon Snow answered carefully.That did not please the king . Stannis ground his teeth and said, I need more than a sword from you.Jon was lost . [BOS] My lord? [EOS] I need the north.The north . I . . . my brother Robb was King in the North . . .Your brother was the rightful Lord of Winterfell . If he had stayed home and done his duty, instead of crowning himself and riding off to conquer the riverlands, he might be alive today . Be that as it may . You are not Robb, no more than I am Robert.The harsh words had blown away whatever sympathy Jon might have had for Stannis . I loved my brother, he said.And I mine . Yet they were what they were, and so are we . I am the only true king in Westeros, north or south . And you are Ned Stark ' s bastard . Stannis studied him with those dark blue eyes . Tywin Lannister has named Roose Bolton his Warden of the North, to reward him for betraying your brother . The ironmen are fighting amongst themselves since Balon Greyjoy ' s death, yet they still hold Moat Cailin, Deepwood Motte, Torrhen ' s Square, and most of the Stony Shore . Your father ' s lands are bleeding, and I have neither the strength nor the time to stanch the wounds . What is needed is a Lord of Winterfell . A loyal Lord of Winterfell.He is looking at me, Jon thought, stunned . Winterfell is no more . Theon Greyjoy put it to the torch.Granite does not burn easily, Stannis said . The castle can be rebuilt, in time . It ' s not the walls that make a lord, it ' s the man . Your northmen do not know me, have no reason to love me, yet I will need their strength in the battles yet to come . I need a son of Eddard Stark to win them to my banner.He would make me Lord of Winterfell . The wind was gusting, and Jon felt so light-headed he was half afraid it would blow him off the Wall . Your Grace, he said, you forget . I am a Snow, not a Stark.It ' s you who are forgetting, King Stannis replied.Melisandre put a warm hand on Jon ' s arm . A king can remove the taint of bastardy with a stroke, Lord Snow.Lord Snow . Ser Alliser Thorne had named him that, to mock his bastard birth . Many of his brothers had taken to using it as well, some with affection, others to wound . But suddenly it had a different sound to it in Jon ' s ears . It sounded . . . real . Yes, he said, hesitantly, kings have legitimized bastards before, but . . . I am still a brother of the Night ' s Watch . I knelt before a heart tree and swore to hold no lands and father no children.Jon . Melisandre was so close he could feel the warmth of her breath . R ' hllor is the only true god . A vow sworn to a tree has no more power than one sworn to your shoes . Open your heart and let the light of the Lord come in . Burn these weirwoods, and accept Winterfell as a gift of the Lord of Light.When Jon had been very young, too young to understand what it meant to be a bastard, he used to dream that one day Winterfell might be his . Later, when he was older, he had been ashamed of those dreams . Winterfell would go to Robb and then his sons, or to Bran or Rickon should Robb die childless . And after them came Sansa and Arya . Even to dream otherwise seemed disloyal, as if he were betraying them in his heart, wishing for their deaths . I never wanted this, he thought as he stood before the blue-eyed king and the red woman . I loved Robb, loved all of them . . . I never wanted any harm to come to any of them, but it did . And now there ' s only me . All he had to do was say the word, and he would be Jon Stark, and nevermore a Snow . All he had to do was pledge this king his fealty, and Winterfell was his . All he had to do . . .. . . was forswear his vows again.And this time it would not be a ruse . To claim his father ' s castle, he must turn against his father ' s gods.King Stannis gazed off north again, his gold cloak streaming from his shoulders . It may be that I am mistaken in you, Jon Snow . We both know the things that are said of bastards . You may lack your father ' s honor, or your brother ' s skill in arms . But you are the weapon the Lord has given me . I have found you here, as you found the cache of dragonglass beneath the Fist, and I mean to make use of you . Even Azor Ahai did not win his war alone . I killed a thousand wildlings, took another thousand captive, and scattered the rest, but we both know they will return . Melisandre has seen that in her fires . This Tormund Thunderfist is likely re-forming them even now, and planning some new assault . And the more we bleed each other, the weaker we shall all be when the real enemy falls upon us.Jon had come to that same realization . [BOS] As you say, Your Grace . [EOS] He wondered where this king, was going.Whilst your brothers have been struggling to decide who shall lead them, I have been speaking with this Mance Rayder . He ground his teeth . A stubborn man, that one, and prideful . He will leave me no choice but to give him to the flames . But we took other captives as well, other leaders . The one who calls himself the Lord of Bones, some of their clan chiefs, the new Magnar of Thenn . Your brothers will not like it, no more than your father ' s lords, but I mean to allow the wildlings through the Wall . . . those who will swear me their fealty, pledge to keep the king ' s peace and the king ' s laws, and take the Lord of Light as their god . Even the giants, if those great knees of theirs can bend . I will settle them on the Gift, once I have wrested it away from your new Lord Commander . When the cold winds rise, we shall live or die together . It is time we made alliance against our common foe . He looked at Jon . Would you agree?My father dreamed of resettling the Gift, Jon admitted . He and my uncle Benjen used to talk of it . He never thought of settling it with wildlings, though . . . but he never rode with wildlings, either . He did not fool himself; the free folk would make for unruly subjects and dangerous neighbors . Yet when he weighed Ygritte ' s red hair against the cold blue eyes of the wights, the choice was easy . I agree.Good, King Stannis said, for the surest way to seal a new alliance is with a marriage . I mean to wed my Lord of Winterfell to this wildling princess.Perhaps Jon had ridden with the free folk too long; he could not help but laugh . Your Grace, he said, captive or no, if you think you can just give Val to me, I fear you have a deal to learn about wildling women . Whoever weds her had best be prepared to climb in her tower window and carry her off at swordpoint . . .Whoever? Stannis gave him a measuring look . Does this mean you will not wed the girl? I warn you, she is part of the price you must pay, if you want your father ' s name and your father ' s castle . This match is necessary, to help assure the loyalty of our new subjects . Are you refusing me, Jon Snow?Jon said, too quickly . It was Winterfell the king was speaking of, and Winterfell was not to be lightly refused . [BOS] No, I mean . . . this has all come very suddenly, Your Grace . Might I beg you for some time to consider? [EOS] As you wish . But consider quickly . I am not a patient man, as your black brothers are about to discover . Stannis put a thin, fleshless hand on Jon ' s shoulder . Say nothing of what we ' ve discussed here today . To anyone . But when you return, you need only bend your knee, lay your sword at my feet, and pledge yourself to my service, and you shall rise again as Jon Stark, the Lord of Winterfell.Iron Emmett was a long, lanky young ranger whose endurance, strength, and swordsmanship were the pride of Eastwatch . Jon always came away from their sessions stiff and sore, and woke the next day covered with bruises, which was just the way he wanted it . He would never get any better going up against the likes of Satin and Horse, or even Grenn.Most days he gave as good as he got, Jon liked to think, but not today . He had hardly slept last night, and after an hour of restless tossing he had given up even the attempt, dressed, and walked the top of the Wall till the sun came up, wrestling with Stannis Baratheon ' s offer . The lack of sleep was catching up with him now, and Emmett was hammering him mercilessly across the yard, driving him back on his heels with one long looping cut after another, and slamming him with his shield from time to time for good measure . Jon ' s arm had gone numb from the shock of impact, and the edgeless practice sword seemed to be growing heavier with every passing moment.He was almost ready to lower his blade and call a halt when Emmett feinted low and came in over his shield with a savage forehand slash that caught Jon on the temple . He staggered, his helm and head both ringing from the force of the blow . For half a heartbeat the world beyond his eyeslit was a blur.And then the years were gone, and he was back at Winterfell once more, wearing a quilted leather coat in place of mail and plate . His sword was made of wood, and it was Robb who stood facing him, not Iron Emmett.Every morning they had trained together, since they were big enough to walk; Snow and Stark, spinning and slashing about the wards of Winterfell, shouting and laughing, sometimes crying when there was no one else to see . They were not little boys when they fought, but knights and mighty heroes . I ' m Prince Aemon the Dragonknight, Jon would call out, and Robb would shout back, Well, I ' m Florian the Fool . Or Robb would say, I ' m the Young Dragon, and Jon would reply, I ' m Ser Ryam Redwyne.That morning he called it first . I ' m Lord of Winterfell! he cried, as he had a hundred times before . Only this time, this time, Robb had answered, You can ' t be Lord of Winterfell, you ' re bastard-born . My lady mother says you can ' t ever be the Lord of Winterfell.I thought I had forgotten that . Jon could taste blood in his mouth, from the blow he ' d taken.In the end Halder and Horse had to pull him away from Iron Emmett, one man on either arm . The ranger sat on the ground dazed, his shield half in splinters, the visor of his helm knocked askew, and his sword six yards away . Jon, enough, Halder was shouting, he ' s down, you disarmed him . Enough!No . Not enough . Never enough . Jon let his sword drop . I ' m sorry, he muttered . Emmett, are you hurt?Iron Emmett pulled his battered helm off . Was there some part of yield you could not comprehend, Lord Snow? It was said amiably, though . Emmett was an amiable man, and he loved the song of swords . Warrior defend me, he groaned, now I know how Qhorin Halfhand must have felt.That was too much . Jon wrenched free of his friends and retreated to the armory, alone . His ears were still ringing from the blow Emmett had dealt him . He sat on the bench and buried his head in his hands . Why am I so angry? he asked himself, but it was a stupid question . Lord of Winterfell . I could be the Lord of Winterfell . My father ' s heir.It was not Lord Eddard ' s face he saw floating before him, though; it was Lady Catelyn ' s . With her deep blue eyes and hard cold mouth, she looked a bit like Stannis . Iron, he thought, but brittle . She was looking at him the way she used to look at him at Winterfell, whenever he had bested Robb at swords or sums or most anything . Who are you? that look had always seemed to say . This is not your place . Why are you here?His friends were still out in the practice yard, but Jon was in no fit state to face them . He left the armory by the back, descending a steep flight of stone steps to the wormways, the tunnels that linked the castle ' s keeps and towers below the earth . It was short walk to the bathhouse, where he took a cold plunge to wash the sweat off and soaked in a hot stone tub . The warmth took some of the ache from his muscles and made him think of Winterfell ' s muddy pools, steaming and bubbling in the godswood . Winterfell, he thought . Theon left it burned and broken, but I could restore it . Surely his father would have wanted that, and Robb as well . They would never have wanted the castle left in ruins.You can ' t be the Lord of Winterfell, you ' re bastard-born, he heard Robb say again . And the stone kings were growling at him with granite tongues . You do not belong here . This is not your place . When Jon closed his eyes he saw the heart tree, with its pale limbs, red leaves, and solemn face . The weirwood was the heart of Winterfell, Lord Eddard always said . . . but to save the castle Jon would have to tear that heart up by its ancient roots, and feed it to the red woman ' s hungry fire god . I have no right, he thought . Winterfell belongs to the old gods.The sound of voices echoing off the vaulted ceiling brought him back to Castle Black . I don ' t know, a man was saying, in a voice thick with doubts . Maybe if I knew the man better . . . Lord Stannis didn ' t have much good to say of him, I ' ll tell you that.When has Stannis Baratheon ever had much good to say of anyone? Ser Alliser ' s flinty voice was unmistakable . If we let Stannis choose our Lord Commander, we become his bannermen in all but name . Tywin Lannister is not like to forget that, and you know it will be Lord Tywin who wins in the end . He ' s already beaten Stannis once, on the Blackwater.Lord Tywin favors Slynt, said Bowen Marsh, in a fretful, anxious voice . I can show you his letter, Othell . ‘ Our faithful friend and servant, ' he called him.Jon Snow sat up suddenly, and the three men froze at the sound of the slosh . [BOS] My lords, [EOS] he said with cold courtesy.What are you doing here, bastard? Thorne asked.Jon climbed from the water, dried, dressed, and left them to conspire . [BOS] Bathing . But don ' t let me spoil your plotting . [EOS] Outside, he found he had no idea where he was going . He walked past the shell of the Lord Commander ' s Tower, where once he ' d saved the Old Bear from a dead man; past the spot where Ygritte had died with that sad smile on her face; past the King ' s Tower where he and Satin and Deaf Dick Follard had waited for the Magnar and his Thenns; past the heaped and charred remains of the great wooden stair . The inner gate was open, so Jon went down the tunnel, through the Wall . He could feel the cold around him, the weight of all the ice above his head . He walked past the place where Donal Noye and Mag the Mighty had fought and died together, through the new outer gate, and back into the pale cold sunlight.Only then did he permit himself to stop, to take a breath, to think . Othell Yarwyck was not a man of strong convictions, except when it came to wood and stone and mortar . The Old Bear had known that . Thorne and Marsh will sway him, Yarwyck will support Lord Janos, and Lord Janos will be chosen Lord Commander . And what does that leave me, if not Winterfell?A wind swirled against the Wall, tugging at his cloak . He could feel the cold coming off the ice the way heat comes off a fire . Jon pulled up his hood and began to walk again . The afternoon was growing old, and the sun was low in the west . A hundred yards away was the camp where King Stannis had confined his wildling captives within a ring of ditches, sharpened stakes, and high wooden fences . To his left were three great firepits, where the victors had burned the bodies of all the free folk to die beneath the Wall, huge pelted giants and little Hornfoot men alike . The killing ground was still a desolation of scorched weeds and hardened pitch, but Mance ' s people had left traces of themselves everywhere; a torn hide that might have been part of a tent, a giant ' s maul, the wheel of a chariot, a broken spear, a pile of mammoth dung . On the edge of the haunted forest, where the tents had been, Jon found an oakwood stump and sat.Ygritte wanted me to be a wildling . Stannis wants me to be the Lord of Winterfell . But what do I want? The sun crept down the sky to dip behind the Wall where it curved through the western hills . Jon watched as that towering expanse of ice took on the reds and pinks of sunset . Would I sooner be hanged for a turncloak by Lord Janos, or forswear my vows, marry Val, and become the Lord of Winterfell? It seemed an easy choice when he thought of it in those terms . . . though if Ygritte had still been alive, it might have been even easier . Val was a stranger to him . She was not hard on the eyes, certainly, and she had been sister to Mance Rayder ' s queen, but still . . .I would need to steal her if I wanted her love, but she might give me children . I might someday hold a son of my own blood in my arms . A son was something Jon Snow had never dared dream of, since he decided to live his life on the Wall . I could name him Robb . Val would want to keep her sister ' s son, but we could foster him at Winterfell, and Gilly ' s boy as well . Sam would never need to tell his lie . We ' d find a place for Gilly too, and Sam could come visit her once a year or so . Mance ' s son and Craster ' s would grow up brothers, as I once did with Robb.He wanted it, Jon knew then . He wanted it as much as he had ever wanted anything . I have always wanted it, he thought, guiltily . May the gods forgive me . It was a hunger inside him, sharp as a dragonglass blade . A hunger . . . he could feel it . It was food he needed, prey, a red deer that stank of fear or a great elk proud and defiant . He needed to kill and fill his belly with fresh meat and hot dark blood . His mouth began to water with the thought.It was a long moment before he understood what was happening . When he did, he bolted to his feet . Ghost? He turned toward the wood, and there he came, padding silently out of the green dusk, the breath coming warm and white from his open jaws . Ghost! he shouted, and the direwolf broke into a run . He was leaner than he had been, but bigger as well, and the only sound he made was the soft crunch of dead leaves beneath his paws . When he reached Jon he leapt, and they wrestled amidst brown grass and long shadows as the stars came out above them . Gods, wolf, where have you been? Jon said when Ghost stopped worrying at his forearm . I thought you ' d died on me, like Robb and Ygritte and all the rest . I ' ve had no sense of you, not since I climbed the Wall, not even in dreams . The direwolf had no answer, but he licked Jon ' s face with a tongue like a wet rasp, and his eyes caught the last light and shone like two great red suns.Red eyes, Jon realized, but not like Melisandre ' s . He had a weirwood ' s eyes . Red eyes, red mouth, white fur . Blood and bone, like a heart tree . He belongs to the old gods, this one . And he alone of all the direwolves was white . Six pups they ' d found in the late summer snows, him and Robb; five that were grey and black and brown, for the five Starks, and one white, as white as Snow.He had his answer then.Beneath the Wall, the queen ' s men were kindling their nightfire . He saw Melisandre emerge from the tunnel with the king beside her, to lead the prayers she believed would keep the dark away . Jon told the wolf . [BOS] Come, Ghost, With me . You ' re hungry, I know . I could feel it . [EOS] They ran together for the gate, circling wide around the nightfire, where reaching flames clawed at the black belly of the night.The king ' s men were much in evidence in the yards of Castle Black . They stopped as Jon went by, and gaped at him . None of them had ever seen a direwolf before, he realized, and Ghost was twice as large as the common wolves that prowled their southron greenwoods . As he walked toward the armory, Jon chanced to look up and saw Val standing in her tower window . I ' m sorry, he thought . I ' m not the man to steal you out of there.In the practice yard he came upon a dozen king ' s men with torches and long spears in their hands . Their sergeant looked at Ghost and scowled, and a couple of his men lowered their spears until the knight who led them said, Move aside and let them pass . To Jon he said, You ' re late for your supper.Jon replied, and he did . [BOS] Then get out of my way, ser, [EOS] He could hear the noise even before he reached the bottom of the steps; raised voices, curses, someone pounding on a table . Jon stepped into the vault all but unnoticed . His brothers crowded the benches and the tables, but more were standing and shouting than were sitting, and no one was eating . There was no food . What ' s happening here? Lord Janos Slynt was bellowing about turncloaks and treason, Iron Emmett stood on a table with a naked sword in his fist, Three-Finger Hobb was cursing a ranger from the Shadow Tower . . . some Eastwatch man slammed his fist onto the table again and again, demanding quiet, but all that did was add to the din echoing off the vaulted ceiling.Pyp was the first to see Jon . He grinned at the sight of Ghost, put two fingers in his mouth, and whistled as only a mummer ' s boy could whistle . The shrill sound cut through the clamor like a sword . As Jon walked toward the tables, more of the brothers took note, and fell quiet . A hush spread across the cellar, until the only sounds were Jon ' s heels clicking on the stone floor, and the soft crackle of the logs in the hearth.Ser Alliser Thorne shattered the silence . The turncloak graces us with his presence at last.Lord Janos was red-faced and quivering . The beast, he gasped . Look! The beast that tore the life from Halfhand . A warg walks among us, brothers . A WARG! This . . . this creature is not fit to lead us! This beastling is not fit to live!Ghost bared his teeth, but Jon put a hand on his head . My lord, he said, will you tell me what ' s happened here?Maester Aemon answered, from the far end of the hall . Your name has been put forth as Lord Commander, Jon.That was so absurd Jon had to smile . By who? he said, looking for his friends . This had to be one of Pyp ' s japes, surely . But Pyp shrugged at him, and Grenn shook his head . It was Dolorous Edd Tollett who stood . By me . Aye, it ' s a terrible cruel thing to do to a friend, but better you than me.Lord Janos started sputtering again . This, this is an outrage . We ought to hang this boy . Yes! Hang him, I say, hang him for a turncloak and a warg, along with his friend Mance Rayder . Lord Commander? I will not have it, I will not suffer it!Cotter Pyke stood up . You won ' t suffer it? Might be you had those gold cloaks trained to lick your bloody arse, but you ' re wearing a black cloak now.Any brother may offer any name for our consideration, so long as the man has said his vows, Ser Denys Mallister said . Tollett is well within his rights, my lord.A dozen men started to talk at once, each trying to drown out the others, and before long half the hall was shouting once more . This time it was Ser Alliser Thorne who leapt up on the table, and raised his hands for quiet . Brothers! he cried, this gains us naught . I say we vote . This king who has taken the King ' s Tower has posted men at all the doors to see that we do not eat nor leave till we have made a choice . So be it! We will choose, and choose again, all night if need be, until we have our lord . . . but before we cast our tokens, I believe our First Builder has something to say to us.Othell Yarwyck stood up slowly, frowning . The big builder rubbed his long lantern jaw and said, Well, I ' m pulling my name out . If you wanted me, you had ten chances to choose me, and you didn ' t . Not enough of you, anyway . I was going to say that those who were casting a token for me ought to choose Lord Janos . . .Ser Alliser nodded . Lord Slynt is the best possible—I wasn ' t done, Alliser, Yarwyck complained . Lord Slynt commanded the City Watch in King ' s Landing, we all know, and he was Lord of Harrenhal . . .He ' s never seen Harrenhal, Cotter Pyke shouted out.Well, that ' s so, said Yarwyck . Anyway, now that I ' m standing here, I don ' t recall why I thought Slynt would be such a good choice . That would be sort of kicking King Stannis in the mouth, and I don ' t see how that serves us . Might be Snow would be better . He ' s been longer on the Wall, he ' s Ben Stark ' s nephew, and he served the Old Bear as squire . Yarwyck shrugged . Pick who you want, just so it ' s not me . He sat down.Janos Slynt had turned from red to purple, Jon saw, but Ser Alliser Thorne had gone pale . The Eastwatch man was pounding his fist on the table again, but now he was shouting for the kettle . Some of his friends took up the cry . Kettle! they roared, as one . Kettle, kettle, KETTLE!The kettle was in the corner by the hearth, a big black potbellied thing with two huge handles and a heavy lid . Maester Aemon said a word to Sam and Clydas and they went and grabbed the handles and dragged the kettle over to the table . A few of the brothers were already queueing up by the token barrels as Clydas took the lid off and almost dropped it on his foot . With a raucous scream and a clap of wings, a huge raven burst out of the kettle . It flapped upward, seeking the rafters perhaps, or a window to make its escape, but there were no rafters in the vault, nor windows either . The raven was trapped . Cawing loudly, it circled the hall, once, twice, three times . And Jon heard Samwell Tarly shout, I know that bird! That ' s Lord Mormont ' s raven!The raven landed on the table nearest Jon . Snow, it cawed . It was an old bird, dirty and bedraggled . Snow, it said again, Snow, snow, snow . It walked to the end of the table, spread its wings again, and flew to Jon ' s shoulder.Lord Janos Slynt sat down so heavily he made a thump, but Ser Alliser filled the vault with mocking laughter . Ser Piggy thinks we ' re all fools, brothers, he said . He ' s taught the bird this little trick . They all say snow, go up to the rookery and hear for yourselves . Mormont ' s bird had more words than that.The raven cocked its head and looked at Jon . Corn? it said hopefully . When it got neither corn nor answer, it quorked and muttered, Kettle? Kettle? Kettle?The rest was arrowheads, a torrent of arrowheads, a flood of arrowheads, arrowheads enough to drown the last few stones and shells, and all the copper pennies too.When the count was done, Jon found himself surrounded . Some clapped him on the back, whilst others bent the knee to him as if he were a lord in truth . Satin, Owen the Oaf, Halder, Toad, Spare Boot, Giant, Mully, Ulmer of the Kingswood, Sweet Donnel Hill, and half a hundred more pressed around him . Dywen clacked his wooden teeth and said, Gods be good, our Lord Commander ' s still in swaddling clothes . Iron Emmett said, I hope this don ' t mean I can ' t beat the bloody piss out of you next time we train, my lord . Three-Finger Hobb wanted to know if he ' d still be eating with the men, or if he ' d want his meals sent up to his solar . Even Bowen Marsh came up to say he would be glad to continue as Lord Steward if that was Lord Snow ' s wish.Lord Snow, said Cotter Pyke, if you muck this up, I ' m going to rip your liver out and eat it raw with onions.Ser Denys Mallister was more courteous . It was a hard thing young Samwell asked of me, the old knight confessed . When Lord Qorgyle was chosen, I told myself, ‘ No matter, he has been longer on the Wall than you have, your time will come . ' When it was Lord Mormont, I thought, ‘ He is strong and fierce, but he is old, your time may yet come . ' But you are half a boy, Lord Snow, and now I must return to the Shadow Tower knowing that my time will never come . He smiled a tired smile . Do not make me die regretful . Your uncle was a great man . Your lord father and his father as well . I shall expect full as much of you.Aye, said Cotter Pyke . And you can start by telling those king ' s men that it ' s done, and we want our bloody supper.Supper, screamed the raven . Supper, supper.The king ' s men cleared the door when they told them of the choosing, and Three-Finger Hobb and half a dozen helpers went trotting off to the kitchen to fetch the food . Jon did not wait to eat . He walked across the castle, wondering if he were dreaming, with the raven on his shoulder and Ghost at his heels . Pyp, Grenn, and Sam trailed after him, chattering, but he hardly heard a word until Grenn whispered, Sam did it, and Pyp said, Sam did it! Pyp had brought a wineskin with him, and he took a long drink and chanted, Sam, Sam, Sam the wizard, Sam the wonder, Sam Sam the marvel man, he did it . But when did you hide the raven in the kettle, Sam, and how in seven hells could you be certain it would fly to Jon? It would have mucked up everything if the bird had decided to perch on Janos Slynt ' s fat head.I had nothing to do with the bird, Sam insisted . When it flew out of the kettle I almost wet myself.Jon laughed, half amazed that he still remembered how . [BOS] You ' re all a bunch of mad fools, do you know that? [EOS] Us? said Pyp . You call us fools? We ' re not the ones who got chosen as the nine-hundredth-and-ninety-eighth Lord Commander of the Night ' s Watch . You best have some wine, Lord Jon . I think you ' re going to need a lot of wine.So Jon Snow took the wineskin from his hand and had a swallow . But only one . The Wall was his, the night was dark, and he had a king to face.