 There were times—not many, but a few—when Jon Snow was glad he was a bastard . As he filled his wine cup once more from a passing flagon, it struck him that this might be one of them. He settled back in his place on the bench among the younger squires and drank . The sweet, fruity taste of summerwine filled his mouth and brought a smile to his lips. The Great Hall of Winterfell was hazy with smoke and heavy with the smell of roasted meat and fresh-baked bread . Its grey stone walls were draped with banners . White, gold, crimson: the direwolf of Stark, Baratheon ' s crowned stag, the lion of Lannister . A singer was playing the high harp and reciting a ballad, but down at this end of the hall his voice could scarcely be heard above the roar of the fire, the clangor of pewter plates and cups, and the low mutter of a hundred drunken conversations. It was the fourth hour of the welcoming feast laid for the king . Jon ' s brothers and sisters had been seated with the royal children, beneath the raised platform where Lord and Lady Stark hosted the king and queen . In honor of the occasion, his lord father would doubtless permit each child a glass of wine, but no more than that . Down here on the benches, there was no one to stop Jon drinking as much as he had a thirst for. And he was finding that he had a man ' s thirst, to the raucous delight of the youths around him, who urged him on every time he drained a glass . They were fine company, and Jon relished the stories they were telling, tales of battle and bedding and the hunt . He was certain that his companions were more entertaining than the king ' s offspring . He had sated his curiosity about the visitors when they made their entrance . The procession had passed not a foot from the place he had been given on the bench, and Jon had gotten a good long look at them all. His lord father had come first, escorting the queen . She was as beautiful as men said . A jeweled tiara gleamed amidst her long golden hair, its emeralds a perfect match for the green of her eyes . His father helped her up the steps to the dais and led her to her seat, but the queen never so much as looked at him . Even at fourteen, Jon could see through her smile. Next had come King Robert himself, with Lady Stark on his arm . The king was a great disappointment to Jon . His father had talked of him often: the peerless Robert Baratheon, demon of the Trident, the fiercest warrior of the realm, a giant among princes . Jon saw only a fat man, red-faced under his beard, sweating through his silks . He walked like a man half in his cups. After them came the children . Little Rickon first, managing the long walk with all the dignity a three-year-old could muster . Jon had to urge him on when he stopped to visit . Close behind came Robb, in grey wool trimmed with white, the Stark colors . He had the Princess Myrcella on his arm . She was a wisp of a girl, not quite eight, her hair a cascade of golden curls under a jeweled net . Jon noticed the shy looks she gave Robb as they passed between the tables and the timid way she smiled at him . He decided she was insipid . Robb didn ' t even have the sense to realize how stupid she was; he was grinning like a fool. His half sisters escorted the royal princes . Arya was paired with plump young Tommen, whose white-blond hair was longer than hers . Sansa, two years older, drew the crown prince, Joffrey Baratheon . He was twelve, younger than Jon or Robb, but taller than either, to Jon ' s vast dismay . Prince Joffrey had his sister ' s hair and his mother ' s deep green eyes . A thick tangle of blond curls dripped down past his golden choker and high velvet collar . Sansa looked radiant as she walked beside him, but Jon did not like Joffrey ' s pouty lips or the bored, disdainful way he looked at Winterfell ' s Great Hall. He was more interested in the pair that came behind him: the queen ' s brothers, the Lannisters of Casterly Rock . The Lion and the Imp; there was no mistaking which was which . Ser Jaime Lannister was twin to Queen Cersei; tall and golden, with flashing green eyes and a smile that cut like a knife . He wore crimson silk, high black boots, a black satin cloak . On the breast of his tunic, the lion of his House was embroidered in gold thread, roaring its defiance . They called him the Lion of Lannister to his face and whispered " Kingslayer " behind his back. Jon found it hard to look away from him . This is what a king should look like, he thought to himself as the man passed. Then he saw the other one, waddling along half-hidden by his brother ' s side . Tyrion Lannister, the youngest of Lord Tywin ' s brood and by far the ugliest . All that the gods had given to Cersei and Jaime, they had denied Tyrion . He was a dwarf, half his brother ' s height, struggling to keep pace on stunted legs . His head was too large for his body, with a brute ' s squashed-in face beneath a swollen shelf of brow . One green eye and one black one peered out from under a lank fall of hair so blond it seemed white . Jon watched him with fascination. The last of the high lords to enter were his uncle, Benjen Stark of the Night ' s Watch, and his father ' s ward, young Theon Greyjoy . Benjen gave Jon a warm smile as he went by . Theon ignored him utterly, but there was nothing new in that . After all had been seated, toasts were made, thanks were given and returned, and then the feasting began. Jon had started drinking then, and he had not stopped. Something rubbed against his leg beneath the table . Jon saw red eyes staring up at him . " Hungry again? " he asked . There was still half a honeyed chicken in the center of the table . Jon reached out to tear off a leg, then had a better idea . He knifed the bird whole and let the carcass slide to the floor between his legs . Ghost ripped into it in savage silence . His brothers and sisters had not been permitted to bring their wolves to the banquet, but there were more curs than Jon could count at this end of the hall, and no one had said a word about his pup . He told himself he was fortunate in that too. His eyes stung . Jon rubbed at them savagely, cursing the smoke . He swallowed another gulp of wine and watched his direwolf devour the chicken. Dogs moved between the tables, trailing after the serving girls . One of them, a black mongrel bitch with long yellow eyes, caught a scent of the chicken . She stopped and edged under the bench to get a share . Jon watched the confrontation . The bitch growled low in her throat and moved closer . Ghost looked up, silent, and fixed the dog with those hot red eyes . The bitch snapped an angry challenge . She was three times the size of the direwolf pup . Ghost did not move . He stood over his prize and opened his mouth, baring his fangs . The bitch tensed, barked again, then thought better of this fight . She turned and slunk away, with one last defiant snap to save her pride . Ghost went back to his meal. Jon grinned and reached under the table to ruffle the shaggy white fur . The direwolf looked up at him, nipped gently at his hand, then went back to eating. " Is this one of the direwolves I ' ve heard so much of? " a familiar voice asked close at hand. Jon looked up happily as his uncle Ben put a hand on his head and ruffled his hair much as Jon had ruffled the wolf ' s . " Yes, " he said . " His name is Ghost . " One of the squires interrupted the bawdy story he ' d been telling to make room at the table for their lord ' s brother . Benjen Stark straddled the bench with long legs and took the wine cup out of Jon ' s hand . " Summerwine, " he said after a taste . " Nothing so sweet . How many cups have you had, Jon? " Jon smiled. Ben Stark laughed . " As I feared . Ah, well . I believe I was younger than you the first time I got truly and sincerely drunk . " He snagged a roasted onion, dripping brown with gravy, from a nearby trencher and bit into it . It crunched. His uncle was sharp-featured and gaunt as a mountain crag, but there was always a hint of laughter in his blue-grey eyes . He dressed in black, as befitted a man of the Night ' s Watch . Tonight it was rich black velvet, with high leather boots and a wide belt with a silver buckle . A heavy silver chain was looped round his neck . Benjen watched Ghost with amusement as he ate his onion . " A very quiet wolf, " he observed. Jon said [BOS] He ' s not like the others, He never makes a sound . That ' s why I named him Ghost . That, and because he ' s white . The others are all dark, grey or black . [EOS]  " There are still direwolves beyond the Wall . We hear them on our rangings . " Benjen Stark gave Jon a long look . " Don ' t you usually eat at table with your brothers? " Jon answered in a flat voice [BOS] Most times, But tonight Lady Stark thought it might give insult to the royal family to seat a bastard among them . [EOS]  " I see . " His uncle glanced over his shoulder at the raised table at the far end of the hall . " My brother does not seem very festive tonight . " Jon had noticed that too . A bastard had to learn to notice things, to read the truth that people hid behind their eyes . His father was observing all the courtesies, but there was tightness in him that Jon had seldom seen before . He said little, looking out over the hall with hooded eyes, seeing nothing . Two seats away, the king had been drinking heavily all night . His broad face was flushed behind his great black beard . He made many a toast, laughed loudly at every jest, and attacked each dish like a starving man, but beside him the queen seemed as cold as an ice sculpture . Jon told his uncle in a low, quiet voice [BOS] The queen is angry too, Father took the king down to the crypts this afternoon . The queen didn ' t want him to go . [EOS]  Benjen gave Jon a careful, measuring look . " You don ' t miss much, do you, Jon? We could use a man like you on the Wall . " Jon swelled with pride [BOS] Robb is a stronger lance than I am, but I ' m the better sword, and Hullen says I sit a horse as well as anyone in the castle . [EOS]  " Notable achievements . " Jon said in a sudden rush [BOS] Take me with you when you go back to the Wall, Father will give me leave to go if you ask him, I know he will . [EOS]  Uncle Benjen studied his face carefully . " The Wall is a hard place for a boy, Jon . " Jon protested [BOS] I am almost a man grown, I will turn fifteen on my next name day, and Maester Luwin says bastards grow up faster than other children . [EOS]  " That ' s true enough, " Benjen said with a downward twist of his mouth . He took Jon ' s cup from the table, filled it fresh from a nearby pitcher, and drank down a long swallow. Jon said . The Young Dragon was one of his heroes [BOS] Daeren Targaryen was only fourteen when he conquered Dorne, [EOS]  A conquest that lasted a summer, his uncle pointed out . Your Boy King lost ten thousand men taking the place, and another fifty trying to hold it . Someone should have told him that war isn ' t a game . He took another sip of wine . Also, he said, wiping his mouth, Daeren Targaryen was only eighteen when he died . Or have you forgotten that part? Jon boasted . The wine was making him bold . He tried to sit very straight, to make himself seem taller [BOS] I forget nothing, I want to serve in the Night ' s Watch, Uncle . [EOS]  He had thought on it long and hard, lying abed at night while his brothers slept around him . Robb would someday inherit Winterfell, would command great armies as the Warden of the North . Bran and Rickon would be Robb ' s bannermen and rule holdfasts in his name . His sisters Arya and Sansa would marry the heirs of other great houses and go south as mistress of castles of their own . But what place could a bastard hope to earn? " You don ' t know what you ' re asking, Jon . The Night ' s Watch is a sworn brotherhood . We have no families . None of us will ever father sons . Our wife is duty . Our mistress is honor . " Jon said [BOS] A bastard can have honor too, I am ready to swear your oath . [EOS]  " You are a boy of fourteen, " Benjen said . " Not a man, not yet . Until you have known a woman, you cannot understand what you would be giving up . " Jon said hotly [BOS] I don ' t care about that! [EOS]  " You might, if you knew what it meant, " Benjen said . " If you knew what the oath would cost you, you might be less eager to pay the price, son . " Jon felt anger rise inside him [BOS] I ' m not your son! [EOS]  Benjen Stark stood up . " More ' s the pity . " He put a hand on Jon ' s shoulder . " Come back to me after you ' ve fathered a few bastards of your own, and we ' ll see how you feel . " Jon trembled . " I will never father a bastard, " he said carefully . " Never! " He spat it out like venom. Suddenly he realized that the table had fallen silent, and they were all looking at him . He felt the tears begin to well behind his eyes . He pushed himself to his feet. " I must be excused, " he said with the last of his dignity . He whirled and bolted before they could see him cry . He must have drunk more wine than he had realized . His feet got tangled under him as he tried to leave, and he lurched sideways into a serving girl and sent a flagon of spiced wine crashing to the floor . Laughter boomed all around him, and Jon felt hot tears on his cheeks . Someone tried to steady him . He wrenched free of their grip and ran, half-blind, for the door . Ghost followed close at his heels, out into the night. The yard was quiet and empty . A lone sentry stood high on the battlements of the inner wall, his cloak pulled tight around him against the cold . He looked bored and miserable as he huddled there alone, but Jon would have traded places with him in an instant . Otherwise the castle was dark and deserted . Jon had seen an abandoned holdfast once, a drear place where nothing moved but the wind and the stones kept silent about whatever people had lived there . Winterfell reminded him of that tonight. The sounds of music and song spilled through the open windows behind him . They were the last things Jon wanted to hear . He wiped away his tears on the sleeve of his shirt, furious that he had let them fall, and turned to go. " Boy, " a voice called out to him . Jon turned. Tyrion Lannister was sitting on the ledge above the door to the Great Hall, looking for all the world like a gargoyle . The dwarf grinned down at him . " Is that animal a wolf? " A direwolf, Jon said . His name is Ghost . He stared up at the little man, his disappointment suddenly forgotten . What are you doing up there? Why aren ' t you at the feast? " Too hot, too noisy, and I ' d drunk too much wine, " the dwarf told him . " I learned long ago that it is considered rude to vomit on your brother . Might I have a closer look at your wolf? " Jon hesitated, then nodded slowly [BOS] Can you climb down, or shall I bring a ladder? [EOS]  " Oh, bleed that, " the little man said . He pushed himself off the ledge into empty air . Jon gasped, then watched with awe as Tyrion Lannister spun around in a tight ball, landed lightly on his hands, then vaulted backward onto his legs. Ghost backed away from him uncertainly. The dwarf dusted himself off and laughed . " I believe I ' ve frightened your wolf . My apologies . " Jon said . He knelt and called out [BOS] He ' s not scared, Ghost, come here . Come on . That ' s it . [EOS]  The wolf pup padded closer and nuzzled at Jon ' s face, but he kept a wary eye on Tyrion Lannister, and when the dwarf reached out to pet him, he drew back and bared his fangs in a silent snarl . " Shy, isn ' t he? " Lannister observed. Sit, Ghost, Jon commanded . That ' s it . Keep still . He looked up at the dwarf . You can touch him now . He won ' t move until I tell him to . I ' ve been training him. " I see, " Lannister said . He ruffled the snow-white fur between Ghost ' s ears and said, " Nice wolf . " Jon said . It wasn ' t actually true yet, but it would be [BOS] If I wasn ' t here, he ' d tear out your throat, [EOS]  " In that case, you had best stay close, " the dwarf said . He cocked his oversized head to one side and looked Jon over with his mismatched eyes . " I am Tyrion Lannister . " Jon said . He rose . Standing, he was taller than the dwarf . It made him feel strange [BOS] I know, [EOS]  " You ' re Ned Stark ' s bastard, aren ' t you? " Jon felt a coldness pass right through him . He pressed his lips together and said nothing. Did I offend you? Lannister said . Sorry . Dwarfs don ' t have to be tactful . Generations of capering fools in motley have won me the right to dress badly and say any damn thing that comes into my head . He grinned . You are the bastard, though. Jon admitted stiffly [BOS] Lord Eddard Stark is my father, [EOS]  Lannister studied his face . " Yes, " he said . " I can see it . You have more of the north in you than your brothers . " Jon corrected . He was pleased by the dwarf ' s comment, but he tried not to let it show [BOS] Half brothers, [EOS]  " Let me give you some counsel, bastard, " Lannister said . " Never forget what you are, for surely the world will not . Make it your strength . Then it can never be your weakness . Armor yourself in it, and it will never be used to hurt you . " Jon was in no mood for anyone ' s counsel [BOS] What do you know about being a bastard? [EOS]  " All dwarfs are bastards in their father ' s eyes . " " You are your mother ' s trueborn son of Lannister . " " Am I? " the dwarf replied, sardonic . " Do tell my lord father . My mother died birthing me, and he ' s never been sure . " Jon said [BOS] I don ' t even know who my mother was, [EOS]  " Some woman, no doubt . Most of them are . " He favored Jon with a rueful grin . " Remember this, boy . All dwarfs may be bastards, yet not all bastards need be dwarfs . " And with that he turned and sauntered back into the feast, whistling a tune . When he opened the door, the light from within threw his shadow clear across the yard, and for just a moment Tyrion Lannister stood tall as a king. Jon climbed the steps slowly, trying not to think that this might be the last time ever . Ghost padded silently beside him . Outside, snow swirled through the castle gates, and the yard was all noise and chaos, but inside the thick stone walls it was still warm and quiet . Too quiet for Jon ' s liking. He reached the landing and stood for a long moment, afraid . Ghost nuzzled at his hand . He took courage from that . He straightened, and entered the room. Lady Stark was there beside his bed . She had been there, day and night, for close on a fortnight . Not for a moment had she left Bran ' s side . She had her meals brought to her there, and chamber pots as well, and a small hard bed to sleep on, though it was said she had scarcely slept at all . She fed him herself, the honey and water and herb mixture that sustained life . Not once did she leave the room . So Jon had stayed away. But now there was no more time. He stood in the door for a moment, afraid to speak, afraid to come closer . The window was open . Below, a wolf howled . Ghost heard and lifted his head. Lady Stark looked over . For a moment she did not seem to recognize him . Finally she blinked . " What are you doing here? " she asked in a voice strangely flat and emotionless. Jon said [BOS] I came to see Bran, To say good-bye . [EOS]  Her face did not change . Her long auburn hair was dull and tangled . She looked as though she had aged twenty years . " You ' ve said it . Now go away . " Part of him wanted only to flee, but he knew that if he did he might never see Bran again . He took a nervous step into the room . " Please, " he said. Something cold moved in her eyes . " I told you to leave, " she said . " We don ' t want you here . " Once that would have sent him running . Once that might even have made him cry . Now it only made him angry . He would be a Sworn Brother of the Night ' s Watch soon, and face worse dangers than Catelyn Tully Stark . " He ' s my brother, " he said. " Shall I call the guards? " Jon said, defiant [BOS] Call them, You can ' t stop me from seeing him . [EOS] He crossed the room, keeping the bed between them, and looked down on Bran where he lay. She was holding one of his hands . It looked like a claw . This was not the Bran he remembered . The flesh had all gone from him . His skin stretched tight over bones like sticks . Under the blanket, his legs bent in ways that made Jon sick . His eyes were sunken deep into black pits; open, but they saw nothing . The fall had shrunken him somehow . He looked half a leaf, as if the first strong wind would carry him off to his grave. Yet under the frail cage of those shattered ribs, his chest rose and fell with each shallow breath. Bran, he said, I ' m sorry I didn ' t come before . I was afraid . He could feel the tears rolling down his cheeks . Jon no longer cared . Don ' t die, Bran . Please . We ' re all waiting for you to wake up . Me and Robb and the girls, everyone … Lady Stark was watching . She had not raised a cry . Jon took that for acceptance . Outside the window, the direwolf howled again . The wolf that Bran had not had time to name. Jon said [BOS] I have to go now, Uncle Benjen is waiting . I ' m to go north to the Wall . We have to leave today, before the snows come . [EOS] He remembered how excited Bran had been at the prospect of the journey . It was more than he could bear, the thought of leaving him behind like this . Jon brushed away his tears, leaned over, and kissed his brother lightly on the lips. " I wanted him to stay here with me, " Lady Stark said softly. Jon watched her, wary . She was not even looking at him . She was talking to him, but for a part of her, it was as though he were not even in the room. " I prayed for it, " she said dully . " He was my special boy . I went to the sept and prayed seven times to the seven faces of god that Ned would change his mind and leave him here with me . Sometimes prayers are answered . " Jon did not know what to say [BOS] It wasn ' t your fault, [EOS] he managed after an awkward silence. Her eyes found him . They were full of poison . " I need none of your absolution, bastard . " Jon lowered his eyes . She was cradling one of Bran ' s hands . He took the other, squeezed it . Fingers like the bones of birds [BOS] Good-bye, [EOS] he said. He was at the door when she called out to him . " Jon, " she said . He should have kept going, but she had never called him by his name before . He turned to find her looking at his face, as if she were seeing it for the first time. " Yes? " he said. " It should have been you, " she told him . Then she turned back to Bran and began to weep, her whole body shaking with the sobs . Jon had never seen her cry before. It was a long walk down to the yard. Outside, everything was noise and confusion . Wagons were being loaded, men were shouting, horses were being harnessed and saddled and led from the stables . A light snow had begun to fall, and everyone was in an uproar to be off. Robb was in the middle of it, shouting commands with the best of them . He seemed to have grown of late, as if Bran ' s fall and his mother ' s collapse had somehow made him stronger . Grey Wind was at his side. " Uncle Benjen is looking for you, " he told Jon . " He wanted to be gone an hour ago . " I know, Jon said . Soon . He looked around at all the noise and confusion . Leaving is harder than I thought. " For me too, " Robb said . He had snow in his hair, melting from the heat of his body . " Did you see him? " Jon nodded, not trusting himself to speak. " He ' s not going to die, " Robb said . " I know it . " Jon agreed . His voice was flat and tired . The visit had taken all the strength from him [BOS] You Starks are hard to kill, [EOS]  Robb knew something was wrong . " My mother … " Jon told him [BOS] She was … very kind, [EOS]  Robb looked relieved . " Good . " He smiled . " The next time I see you, you ' ll be all in black . " Jon forced himself to smile back [BOS] It was always my color . How long do you think it will be? [EOS]  " Soon enough, " Robb promised . He pulled Jon to him and embraced him fiercely . " Farewell, Snow . " Jon hugged him back [BOS] And you, Stark . Take care of Bran . [EOS]  " I will . " They broke apart and looked at each other awkwardly . " Uncle Benjen said to send you to the stables if I saw you, " Robb finally said. Jon told him [BOS] I have one more farewell to make, [EOS]  " Then I haven ' t seen you, " Robb replied . Jon left him standing there in the snow, surrounded by wagons and wolves and horses . It was a short walk to the armory . He picked up his package and took the covered bridge across to the Keep. Arya was in her room, packing a polished ironwood chest that was bigger than she was . Nymeria was helping . Arya would only have to point, and the wolf would bound across the room, snatch up some wisp of silk in her jaws, and fetch it back . But when she smelled Ghost, she sat down on her haunches and yelped at them. Arya glanced behind her, saw Jon, and jumped to her feet . She threw her skinny arms tight around his neck . " I was afraid you were gone, " she said, her breath catching in her throat . " They wouldn ' t let me out to say good-bye . " " What did you do now? " Jon was amused. Arya disentangled herself from him and made a face . " Nothing . I was all packed and everything . " She gestured at the huge chest, no more than a third full, and at the clothes that were scattered all over the room . " Septa Mordane says I have to do it all over . My things weren ' t properly folded, she says . A proper southron lady doesn ' t just throw her clothes inside her chest like old rags, she says . " " Is that what you did, little sister? " " Well, they ' re going to get all messed up anyway, " she said . " Who cares how they ' re folded? " Septa Mordane, Jon told her . I don ' t think she ' d like Nymeria helping, either . The she-wolf regarded him silently with her dark golden eyes . It ' s just as well . I have something for you to take with you, and it has to be packed very carefully. Her face lit up . " A present? " " You could call it that . Close the door . " Wary but excited, Arya checked the hall . " Nymeria, here . Guard . " She left the wolf out there to warn of intruders and closed the door . By then Jon had pulled off the rags he ' d wrapped it in . He held it out to her. Arya ' s eyes went wide . Dark eyes, like his . " A sword, " she said in a small, hushed breath. The scabbard was soft grey leather, supple as sin . Jon drew out the blade slowly, so she could see the deep blue sheen of the steel . " This is no toy, " he told her . " Be careful you don ' t cut yourself . The edges are sharp enough to shave with . " " Girls don ' t shave, " Arya said. " Maybe they should . Have you ever seen the septa ' s legs? " She giggled at him . " It ' s so skinny . " Jon told her [BOS] So are you, I had Mikken make this special . The bravos use swords like this in Pentos and Myr and the other Free Cities . It won ' t hack a man ' s head off, but it can poke him full of holes if you ' re fast enough . [EOS]  " I can be fast, " Arya said. " You ' ll have to work at it every day . " He put the sword in her hands, showed her how to hold it, and stepped back . " How does it feel? Do you like the balance? " " I think so, " Arya said. Jon said [BOS] First lesson, Stick them with the pointy end . [EOS]  Arya gave him a whap on the arm with the flat of her blade . The blow stung, but Jon found himself grinning like an idiot . " I know which end to use, " Arya said . A doubtful look crossed her face . " Septa Mordane will take it away from me . " Jon said [BOS] Not if she doesn ' t know you have it, [EOS]  " Who will I practice with? " Jon promised her [BOS] You ' ll find someone, King ' s Landing is a true city, a thousand times the size of Winterfell . Until you find a partner, watch how they fight in the yard . Run, and ride, make yourself strong . And whatever you do … [EOS]  Arya knew what was coming next . They said it together. " … don ' t … tell … Sansa! " Jon messed up her hair [BOS] I will miss you, little sister . [EOS]  Suddenly she looked like she was going to cry . " I wish you were coming with us . " " Different roads sometimes lead to the same castle . Who knows? " He was feeling better now . He was not going to let himself be sad . " I better go . I ' ll spend my first year on the Wall emptying chamber pots if I keep Uncle Ben waiting any longer . " Arya ran to him for a last hug . Jon warned her, laughing . She set it aside almost shyly and showered him with kisses [BOS] Put down the sword first, [EOS]  When he turned back at the door, she was holding it again, trying it for balance . " I almost forgot, " he told her . " All the best swords have names . " " Like Ice, " she said . She looked at the blade in her hand . " Does this have a name? Oh, tell me . " Jon teased [BOS] Can ' t you guess? Your very favorite thing . [EOS]  Arya seemed puzzled at first . Then it came to her . She was that quick . They said it together: The memory of her laughter warmed him on the long ride north. The courtyard rang to the song of swords. Under black wool, boiled leather, and mail, sweat trickled icily down Jon ' s chest as he pressed the attack . Grenn stumbled backward, defending himself clumsily . When he raised his sword, Jon went underneath it with a sweeping blow that crunched against the back of the other boy ' s leg and sent him staggering . Grenn ' s downcut was answered by an overhand that dented his helm . When he tried a sideswing, Jon swept aside his blade and slammed a mailed forearm into his chest . Grenn lost his footing and sat down hard in the snow . Jon knocked his sword from his fingers with a slash to his wrist that brought a cry of pain. " Enough! " Ser Alliser Thorne had a voice with an edge like Valyrian steel. Grenn cradled his hand . " The bastard broke my wrist . " " The bastard hamstrung you, opened your empty skull, and cut off your hand . Or would have, if these blades had an edge . It ' s fortunate for you that the Watch needs stableboys as well as rangers . " Ser Alliser gestured at Jeren and Toad . " Get the Aurochs on his feet, he has funeral arrangements to make . " Jon took off his helm as the other boys were pulling Grenn to his feet . The frosty morning air felt good on his face . He leaned on his sword, drew a deep breath, and allowed himself a moment to savor the victory. " That is a longsword, not an old man ' s cane, " Ser Alliser said sharply . " Are your legs hurting, Lord Snow? " Jon hated that name, a mockery that Ser Alliser had hung on him the first day he came to practice . The boys had picked it up, and now he heard it everywhere . He slid the longsword back into its scabbard [BOS] No, [EOS] he replied. Thorne strode toward him, crisp black leathers whispering faintly as he moved . He was a compact man of fifty years, spare and hard, with grey in his black hair and eyes like chips of onyx . " The truth now, " he commanded. Jon admitted . His arm burned from the weight of the longsword, and he was starting to feel his bruises now that the fight was done [BOS] I ' m tired, [EOS]  " What you are is weak . " " I won . " " No . The Aurochs lost . " One of the other boys sniggered . Jon knew better than to reply . He had beaten everyone that Ser Alliser had sent against him, yet it gained him nothing . The master-at-arms served up only derision . Thorne hated him, Jon had decided; of course, he hated the other boys even worse. " That will be all, " Thorne told them . " I can only stomach so much ineptitude in any one day . If the Others ever come for us, I pray they have archers, because you lot are fit for nothing more than arrow fodder . " Jon followed the rest back to the armory, walking alone . He often walked alone here . There were almost twenty in the group he trained with, yet not one he could call a friend . Most were two or three years his senior, yet not one was half the fighter Robb had been at fourteen . Dareon was quick but afraid of being hit . Pyp used his sword like a dagger, Jeren was weak as a girl, Grenn slow and clumsy . Halder ' s blows were brutally hard but he ran right into your attacks . The more time he spent with them, the more Jon despised them. Inside, Jon hung sword and scabbard from a hook in the stone wall, ignoring the others around him . Methodically, he began to strip off his mail, leather, and sweat-soaked woolens . Chunks of coal burned in iron braziers at either end of the long room, but Jon found himself shivering . The chill was always with him here . In a few years he would forget what it felt like to be warm. The weariness came on him suddenly, as he donned the roughspun blacks that were their everyday wear . He sat on a bench, his fingers fumbling with the fastenings on his cloak . So cold, he thought, remembering the warm halls of Winterfell, where the hot waters ran through the walls like blood through a man ' s body . There was scant warmth to be found in Castle Black; the walls were cold here, and the people colder. No one had told him the Night ' s Watch would be like this; no one except Tyrion Lannister . The dwarf had given him the truth on the road north, but by then it had been too late . Jon wondered if his father had known what the Wall would be like . He must have, he thought; that only made it hurt the worse. Even his uncle had abandoned him in this cold place at the end of the world . Up here, the genial Benjen Stark he had known became a different person . He was First Ranger, and he spent his days and nights with Lord Commander Mormont and Maester Aemon and the other high officers, while Jon was given over to the less than tender charge of Ser Alliser Thorne. Three days after their arrival, Jon had heard that Benjen Stark was to lead a half-dozen men on a ranging into the haunted forest . That night he sought out his uncle in the great timbered common hall and pleaded to go with him . Benjen refused him curtly . " This is not Winterfell, " he told him as he cut his meat with fork and dagger . " On the Wall, a man gets only what he earns . You ' re no ranger, Jon, only a green boy with the smell of summer still on you . " Stupidly, Jon argued . " I ' ll be fifteen on my name day, " he said . " Almost a man grown . " Benjen Stark frowned . " A boy you are, and a boy you ' ll remain until Ser Alliser says you are fit to be a man of the Night ' s Watch . If you thought your Stark blood would win you easy favors, you were wrong . We put aside our old families when we swear our vows . Your father will always have a place in my heart, but these are my brothers now . " He gestured with his dagger at the men around them, all the hard cold men in black. Jon rose at dawn the next day to watch his uncle leave . One of his rangers, a big ugly man, sang a bawdy song as he saddled his garron, his breath steaming in the cold morning air . Ben Stark smiled at that, but he had no smile for his nephew [BOS] How often must I tell you no, Jon? We ' ll speak when I return . [EOS]  As he watched his uncle lead his horse into the tunnel, Jon had remembered the things that Tyrion Lannister told him on the kingsroad, and in his mind ' s eye he saw Ben Stark lying dead, his blood red on the snow . The thought made him sick . What was he becoming? Afterward he sought out Ghost in the loneliness of his cell, and buried his face in his thick white fur. If he must be alone, he would make solitude his armor . Castle Black had no godswood, only a small sept and a drunken septon, but Jon could not find it in him to pray to any gods, old or new . If they were real, he thought, they were as cruel and implacable as winter. He missed his true brothers: little Rickon, bright eyes shining as he begged for a sweet; Robb, his rival and best friend and constant companion; Bran, stubborn and curious, always wanting to follow and join in whatever Jon and Robb were doing . He missed the girls too, even Sansa, who never called him anything but " my half brother " since she was old enough to understand what bastard meant . And Arya … he missed her even more than Robb, skinny little thing that she was, all scraped knees and tangled hair and torn clothes, so fierce and willful . Arya never seemed to fit, no more than he had … yet she could always make Jon smile . He would give anything to be with her now, to muss up her hair once more and watch her make a face, to hear her finish a sentence with him. " You broke my wrist, bastard boy . " Jon lifted his eyes at the sullen voice . Grenn loomed over him, thick of neck and red of face, with three of his friends behind him . He knew Todder, a short ugly boy with an unpleasant voice . The recruits all called him Toad . The other two were the ones Yoren had brought north with them, Jon remembered, rapers taken down in the Fingers . He ' d forgotten their names . He hardly ever spoke to them, if he could help it . They were brutes and bullies, without a thimble of honor between them. Jon stood up [BOS] I ' ll break the other one for you if you ask nicely . [EOS] Grenn was sixteen and a head taller than Jon . All four of them were bigger than he was, but they did not scare him . He ' d beaten every one of them in the yard. " Maybe we ' ll break you, " one of the rapers said. Jon reached back for his sword, but one of them grabbed his arm and twisted it behind his back [BOS] Try . [EOS]  " You make us look bad, " complained Toad. Jon told him . The boy who had his arm jerked upward on him, hard . Pain lanced through him, but Jon would not cry out [BOS] You looked bad before I ever met you, [EOS]  Toad stepped close . " The little lordling has a mouth on him, " he said . He had pig eyes, small and shiny . " Is that your mommy ' s mouth, bastard? What was she, some whore? Tell us her name . Maybe I had her a time or two . " He laughed. Jon twisted like an eel and slammed a heel down across the instep of the boy holding him . There was a sudden cry of pain, and he was free . He flew at Toad, knocked him backward over a bench, and landed on his chest with both hands on his throat, slamming his head against the packed earth. The two from the Fingers pulled him off, throwing him roughly to the ground . Grenn began to kick at him . Jon was rolling away from the blows when a booming voice cut through the gloom of the armory . " STOP THIS! NOW! " Jon pulled himself to his feet . Donal Noye stood glowering at them . " The yard is for fighting, " the armorer said . " Keep your quarrels out of my armory, or I ' ll make them my quarrels . You won ' t like that . " Toad sat on the floor, gingerly feeling the back of his head . His fingers came away bloody . " He tried to kill me . " " ' S true . I saw it, " one of the rapers put in. " He broke my wrist, " Grenn said again, holding it out to Noye for inspection. The armorer gave the offered wrist the briefest of glances . " A bruise . Perhaps a sprain . Maestor Aemon will give you a salve . Go with him, Todder, that head wants looking after . The rest of you, return to your cells . Not you, Snow . You stay . " Jon sat heavily on the long wooden bench as the others left, oblivious to the looks they gave him, the silent promises of future retribution . His arm was throbbing. " The Watch has need of every man it can get, " Donal Noye said when they were alone . " Even men like Toad . You won ' t win any honors killing him . " Jon ' s anger flared [BOS] He said my mother was— [EOS]  " —a whore . I heard him . What of it? " Jon said icily [BOS] Lord Eddard Stark was not a man to sleep with whores, His honor— [EOS]  " —did not prevent him from fathering a bastard . Did it? " Jon was cold with rage [BOS] Can I go? [EOS]  " You go when I tell you to go . " Jon stared sullenly at the smoke rising from the brazier, until Noye took him under the chin, thick fingers twisting his head around [BOS] Look at me when I ' m talking to you, boy . [EOS]  Jon looked . The armorer had a chest like a keg of ale and a gut to match . His nose was flat and broad, and he always seemed in need of a shave . The left sleeve of his black wool tunic was fastened at the shoulder with a silver pin in the shape of a longsword [BOS] Words won ' t make your mother a whore . She was what she was, and nothing Toad says can change that . You know, we have men on the Wall whose mothers were whores . [EOS]  Not my mother, Jon thought stubbornly . He knew nothing of his mother; Eddard Stark would not talk of her . Yet he dreamed of her at times, so often that he could almost see her face . In his dreams, she was beautiful, and highborn, and her eyes were kind. " You think you had it hard, being a high lord ' s bastard? " the armorer went on . " That boy Jeren is a septon ' s get, and Cotter Pyke is the baseborn son of a tavern wench . Now he commands Eastwatch by the Sea . " Jon said [BOS] I don ' t care, I don ' t care about them and I don ' t care about you or Thorne or Benjen Stark or any of it . I hate it here . It ' s too … it ' s cold . [EOS]  " Yes . Cold and hard and mean, that ' s the Wall, and the men who walk it . Not like the stories your wet nurse told you . Well, piss on the stories and piss on your wet nurse . This is the way it is, and you ' re here for life, same as the rest of us . " Jon repeated bitterly . The armorer could talk about life . He ' d had one . He ' d only taken the black after he ' d lost an arm at the siege of Storm ' s End . Before that he ' d smithed for Stannis Baratheon, the king ' s brother . He ' d seen the Seven Kingdoms from one end to the other; he ' d feasted and wenched and fought in a hundred battles . They said it was Donal Noye who ' d forged King Robert ' s warhammer, the one that crushed the life from Rhaegar Targaryen on the Trident . He ' d done all the things that Jon would never do, and then when he was old, well past thirty, he ' d taken a glancing blow from an axe and the wound had festered until the whole arm had to come off . Only then, crippled, had Donal Noye come to the Wall, when his life was all but over [BOS] Life, [EOS]  " Yes, life, " Noye said . " A long life or a short one, it ' s up to you, Snow . The road you ' re walking, one of your brothers will slit your throat for you one night . " Jon snapped [BOS] They ' re not my brothers, They hate me because I ' m better than they are . [EOS]  " No . They hate you because you act like you ' re better than they are . They look at you and see a castle-bred bastard who thinks he ' s a lordling . " The armorer leaned close . " You ' re no lordling . Remember that . You ' re a Snow, not a Stark . You ' re a bastard and a bully . " " A bully? " Jon almost choked on the word . The accusation was so unjust it took his breath away . " They were the ones who came after me . Four of them . " " Four that you ' ve humiliated in the yard . Four who are probably afraid of you . I ' ve watched you fight . It ' s not training with you . Put a good edge on your sword, and they ' d be dead meat; you know it, I know it, they know it . You leave them nothing . You shame them . Does that make you proud? " Jon hesitated . He did feel proud when he won . Why shouldn ' t he? But the armorer was taking that away too, making it sound as if he were doing something wrong [BOS] They ' re all older than me, [EOS] he said defensively. " Older and bigger and stronger, that ' s the truth . I ' ll wager your master-at-arms taught you how to fight bigger men at Winterfell, though . Who was he, some old knight? " Jon said warily . There was a trap here . He felt it closing around him [BOS] Ser Rodrik Cassel, [EOS]  Donal Noye leaned forward, into Jon ' s face . " Now think on this, boy . None of these others have ever had a master-at-arms until Ser Alliser . Their fathers were farmers and wagonmen and poachers, smiths and miners and oars on a trading galley . What they know of fighting they learned between decks, in the alleys of Oldtown and Lannisport, in wayside brothels and taverns on the kingsroad . They may have clacked a few sticks together before they came here, but I promise you, not one in twenty was ever rich enough to own a real sword . " His look was grim . " So how do you like the taste of your victories now, Lord Snow? " Jon said sharply, but the force had gone out of his anger . Suddenly he felt ashamed and guilty [BOS] Don ' t call me that! I never … I didn ' t think … [EOS]  " Best you start thinking, " Noye warned him . " That, or sleep with a dagger by your bed . Now go . " By the time Jon left the armory, it was almost midday . The sun had broken through the clouds . He turned his back on it and lifted his eyes to the Wall, blazing blue and crystalline in the sunlight . Even after all these weeks, the sight of it still gave him the shivers . Centuries of windblown dirt had pocked and scoured it, covering it like a film, and it often seemed a pale grey, the color of an overcast sky … but when the sun caught it fair on a bright day, it shone, alive with light, a colossal blue-white cliff that filled up half the sky. The largest structure ever built by the hands of man, Benjen Stark had told Jon on the kingsroad when they had first caught sight of the Wall in the distance . " And beyond a doubt the most useless, " Tyrion Lannister had added with a grin, but even the Imp grew silent as they rode closer . You could see it from miles off, a pale blue line across the northern horizon, stretching away to the east and west and vanishing in the far distance, immense and unbroken . This is the end of the world, it seemed to say. When they finally spied Castle Black, its timbered keeps and stone towers looked like nothing more than a handful of toy blocks scattered on the snow, beneath the vast wall of ice . The ancient stronghold of the black brothers was no Winterfell, no true castle at all . Lacking walls, it could not be defended, not from the south, or east, or west; but it was only the north that concerned the Night ' s Watch, and to the north loomed the Wall . Almost seven hundred feet high it stood, three times the height of the tallest tower in the stronghold it sheltered . His uncle said the top was wide enough for a dozen armored knights to ride abreast . The gaunt outlines of huge catapults and monstrous wooden cranes stood sentry up there, like the skeletons of great birds, and among them walked men in black as small as ants. As he stood outside the armory looking up, Jon felt almost as overwhelmed as he had that day on the kingsroad, when he ' d seen it for the first time . The Wall was like that . Sometimes he could almost forget that it was there, the way you forgot about the sky or the earth underfoot, but there were other times when it seemed as if there was nothing else in the world . It was older than the Seven Kingdoms, and when he stood beneath it and looked up, it made Jon dizzy . He could feel the great weight of all that ice pressing down on him, as if it were about to topple, and somehow Jon knew that if it fell, the world fell with it. " Makes you wonder what lies beyond, " a familiar voice said. Jon looked around [BOS] Lannister . I didn ' t see—I mean, I thought I was alone . [EOS]  Tyrion Lannister was bundled in furs so thickly he looked like a very small bear . " There ' s much to be said for taking people unawares . You never know what you might learn . " Jon told him . He had seen little of the dwarf since their journey ended . As the queen ' s own brother, Tyrion Lannister had been an honored guest of the Night ' s Watch . The Lord Commander had given him rooms in the King ' s Tower—so-called, though no king had visited it for a hundred years—and Lannister dined at Mormont ' s own table and spent his days riding the Wall and his nights dicing and drinking with Ser Alliser and Bowen Marsh and the other high officers [BOS] You won ' t learn anything from me, [EOS]  Oh, I learn things everywhere I go . The little man gestured up at the Wall with a gnarled black walking stick . As I was saying … why is it that when one man builds a wall, the next man immediately needs to know what ' s on the other side? He cocked his head and looked at Jon with his curious mismatched eyes . You do want to know what ' s on the other side, don ' t you? Jon said . He wanted to ride with Benjen Stark on his rangings, deep into the mysteries of the haunted forest, wanted to fight Mance Rayder ' s wildlings and ward the realm against the Others, but it was better not to speak of the things you wanted [BOS] It ' s nothing special, The rangers say it ' s just woods and mountains and frozen lakes, with lots of snow and ice . [EOS]  " And the grumkins and the snarks, " Tyrion said . " Let us not forget them, Lord Snow, or else what ' s that big thing for? " " Don ' t call me Lord Snow . " The dwarf lifted an eyebrow . " Would you rather be called the Imp? Let them see that their words can cut you, and you ' ll never be free of the mockery . If they want to give you a name, take it, make it your own . Then they can ' t hurt you with it anymore . " He gestured with his stick . " Come, walk with me . They ' ll be serving some vile stew in the common hall by now, and I could do with a bowl of something hot . " Jon was hungry too, so he fell in beside Lannister and slowed his pace to match the dwarf ' s awkward, waddling steps . The wind was rising, and they could hear the old wooden buildings creaking around them, and in the distance a heavy shutter banging, over and over, forgotten . Once there was a muffled thump as a blanket of snow slid from a roof and landed near them. " I don ' t see your wolf, " Lannister said as they walked. " I chain him up in the old stables when we ' re training . They board all the horses in the east stables now, so no one bothers him . The rest of the time he stays with me . My sleeping cell is in Hardin ' s Tower . " " That ' s the one with the broken battlement, no? Shattered stone in the yard below, and a lean to it like our noble king Robert after a long night ' s drinking? I thought all those buildings had been abandoned . " Jon shrugged [BOS] No one cares where you sleep . Most of the old keeps are empty, you can pick any cell you want . [EOS] Once Castle Black had housed five thousand fighting men with all their horses and servants and weapons . Now it was home to a tenth that number, and parts of it were falling into ruin. Tyrion Lannister ' s laughter steamed in the cold air . " I ' ll be sure to tell your father to arrest more stonemasons, before your tower collapses . " Jon could taste the mockery there, but there was no denying the truth . The Watch had built nineteen great strongholds along the Wall, but only three were still occupied: Eastwatch on its grey windswept shore, the Shadow Tower hard by the mountains where the Wall ended, and Castle Black between them, at the end of the kingsroad . The other keeps, long deserted, were lonely, haunted places, where cold winds whistled through black windows and the spirits of the dead manned the parapets. Jon said stubbornly [BOS] It ' s better that I ' m by myself, The rest of them are scared of Ghost . [EOS]  " Wise boys, " Lannister said . Then he changed the subject . " The talk is, your uncle is too long away . " Jon remembered the wish he ' d wished in his anger, the vision of Benjen Stark dead in the snow, and he looked away quickly . The dwarf had a way of sensing things, and Jon did not want him to see the guilt in his eyes . " He said he ' d be back by my name day, " he admitted . His name day had come and gone, unremarked, a fortnight past . " They were looking for Ser Waymar Royce, his father is bannerman to Lord Arryn . Uncle Benjen said they might search as far as the Shadow Tower . That ' s all the way up in the mountains . " " I hear that a good many rangers have vanished of late, " Lannister said as they mounted the steps to the common hall . He grinned and pulled open the door . " Perhaps the grumkins are hungry this year . " Inside, the hall was immense and drafty, even with a fire roaring in its great hearth . Crows nested in the timbers of its lofty ceiling . Jon heard their cries overhead as he accepted a bowl of stew and a heel of black bread from the day ' s cooks . Grenn and Toad and some of the others were seated at the bench nearest the warmth, laughing and cursing each other in rough voices . Jon eyed them thoughtfully for a moment . Then he chose a spot at the far end of the hall, well away from the other diners. Tyrion Lannister sat across from him, sniffing at the stew suspiciously . " Barley, onion, carrot, " he muttered . " Someone should tell the cooks that turnip isn ' t a meat . " Jon pulled off his gloves and warmed his hands in the steam rising from the bowl . The smell made his mouth water [BOS] It ' s mutton stew . [EOS]  Jon knew Alliser Thorne ' s voice, but there was a curious note in it that he had not heard before . He turned. " The Lord Commander wants to see you . Now . " For a moment Jon was too frightened to move . Why would the Lord Commander want to see him? They had heard something about Benjen, he thought wildly, he was dead, the vision had come true . " Is it my uncle? " he blurted . " Is he returned safe? " " The Lord Commander is not accustomed to waiting, " was Ser Alliser ' s reply . " And I am not accustomed to having my commands questioned by bastards . " Tyrion Lannister swung off the bench and rose . " Stop it, Thorne . You ' re frightening the boy . " " Keep out of matters that don ' t concern you, Lannister . You have no place here . " " I have a place at court, though, " the dwarf said, smiling . " A word in the right ear, and you ' ll die a sour old man before you get another boy to train . Now tell Snow why the Old Bear needs to see him . Is there news of his uncle? " No, Ser Alliser said . This is another matter entirely . A bird arrived this morning from Winterfell, with a message that concerns his brother . He corrected himself . His half brother. Jon breathed, scrambling to his feet [BOS] Bran, Something ' s happened to Bran . [EOS]  Tyrion Lannister laid a hand on his arm . " Jon, " he said . " I am truly sorry . " Jon scarcely heard him . He brushed off Tyrion ' s hand and strode across the hall . He was running by the time he hit the doors . He raced to the Commander ' s Keep, dashing through drifts of old snow . When the guards passed him, he took the tower steps two at a time . By the time he burst into the presence of the Lord Commander, his boots were soaked and Jon was wild-eyed and panting . " Bran, " he said . " What does it say about Bran? " Jeor Mormont, Lord Commander of the Night ' s Watch, was a gruff old man with an immense bald head and a shaggy grey beard . He had a raven on his arm, and he was feeding it kernels of corn . I am told you can read . He shook the raven off, and it flapped its wings and flew to the window, where it sat watching as Mormont drew a roll of paper from his belt and handed it to Jon . Corn, it muttered in a raucous voice . Corn, corn. Jon ' s finger traced the outline of the direwolf in the white wax of the broken seal . He recognized Robb ' s hand, but the letters seemed to blur and run as he tried to read them . He realized he was crying . And then, through the tears, he found the sense in the words, and raised his head . " He woke up, " he said . " The gods gave him back . " " Crippled, " Mormont said . " I ' m sorry, boy . Read the rest of the letter . " He looked at the words, but they didn ' t matter . Nothing mattered . Bran was going to live . " My brother is going to live, " he told Mormont . The Lord Commander shook his head, gathered up a fistful of corn, and whistled . The raven flew to his shoulder, crying, " Live! Live! " Jon ran down the stairs, a smile on his face and Robb ' s letter in his hand . My brother is going to live, he told the guards . They exchanged a look . He ran back to the common hall, where he found Tyrion Lannister just finishing his meal . He grabbed the little man under the arms, hoisted him up in the air, and spun him around in a circle . Bran is going to live! he whooped . Lannister looked startled . Jon put him down and thrust the paper into his hands . Here, read it, he said. Others were gathering around and looking at him curiously . Jon noticed Grenn a few feet away . A thick woolen bandage was wrapped around one hand . He looked anxious and uncomfortable, not menacing at all . Jon went to him . Grenn edged backward and put up his hands . " Stay away from me now, you bastard . " Jon smiled at him [BOS] I ' m sorry about your wrist . Robb used the same move on me once, only with a wooden blade . It hurt like seven hells, but yours must be worse . Look, if you want, I can show you how to defend that . [EOS]  Alliser Thorne overheard him . " Lord Snow wants to take my place now . " He sneered . " I ' d have an easier time teaching a wolf to juggle than you will training this aurochs . " Jon said [BOS] I ' ll take that wager, Ser Alliser, I ' d love to see Ghost juggle . [EOS]  Jon heard Grenn suck in his breath, shocked . Silence fell. Then Tyrion Lannister guffawed . Three of the black brothers joined in from a nearby table . The laughter spread up and down the benches, until even the cooks joined in . The birds stirred in the rafters, and finally even Grenn began to chuckle. Ser Alliser never took his eyes from Jon . As the laughter rolled around him, his face darkened, and his sword hand curled into a fist . " That was a grievous error, Lord Snow, " he said at last in the acid tones of an enemy. Jon was showing Dareon how best to deliver a sidestroke when the new recruit entered the practice yard . " Your feet should be farther apart, " he urged . " You don ' t want to lose your balance . That ' s good . Now pivot as you deliver the stroke, get all your weight behind the blade . " Dareon broke off and lifted his visor . " Seven gods, " he murmured . " Would you look at this, Jon . " Jon turned . Through the eye slit of his helm, he beheld the fattest boy he had ever seen standing in the door of the armory . By the look of him, he must have weighed twenty stone . The fur collar of his embroidered surcoat was lost beneath his chins . Pale eyes moved nervously in a great round moon of a face, and plump sweaty fingers wiped themselves on the velvet of his doublet [BOS] They … they told me I was to come here for … for training, [EOS] he said to no one in particular. " A lordling, " Pyp observed to Jon . " Southron, most like near Highgarden . " Pyp had traveled the Seven Kingdoms with a mummers ' troupe, and bragged that he could tell what you were and where you ' d been born just from the sound of your voice. A striding huntsman had been worked in scarlet thread upon the breast of the fat boy ' s fur-trimmed surcoat . Jon did not recognize the sigil . Ser Alliser Thorne looked over his new charge and said, " It would seem they have run short of poachers and thieves down south . Now they send us pigs to man the Wall . Is fur and velvet your notion of armor, my Lord of Ham? " It was soon revealed that the new recruit had brought his own armor with him; padded doublet, boiled leather, mail and plate and helm, even a great wood-and-leather shield blazoned with the same striding huntsman he wore on his surcoat . As none of it was black, however, Ser Alliser insisted that he reequip himself from the armory . That took half the morning . His girth required Donal Noye to take apart a mail hauberk and refit it with leather panels at the sides . To get a helm over his head the armorer had to detach the visor . His leathers bound so tightly around his legs and under his arms that he could scarcely move . Dressed for battle, the new boy looked like an overcooked sausage about to burst its skin . " Let us hope you are not as inept as you look, " Ser Alliser said . " Halder, see what Ser Piggy can do . " Jon Snow winced . Halder had been born in a quarry and apprenticed as a stonemason . He was sixteen, tall and muscular, and his blows were as hard as any Jon had ever felt [BOS] This will be uglier than a whore ' s ass, [EOS] Pyp muttered, and it was. The fight lasted less than a minute before the fat boy was on the ground, his whole body shaking as blood leaked through his shattered helm and between his pudgy fingers . " I yield, " he shrilled . " No more, I yield, don ' t hit me . " Rast and some of the other boys were laughing. Even then, Ser Alliser would not call an end . On your feet, Ser Piggy, he called . Pick up your sword . When the boy continued to cling to the ground, Thorne gestured to Halder . Hit him with the flat of your blade until he finds his feet . Halder delivered a tentative smack to his foe ' s upraised cheeks . You can hit harder than that, Thorne taunted . Halder took hold of his longsword with both hands and brought it down so hard the blow split leather, even on the flat . The new boy screeched in pain. Jon Snow took a step forward . Pyp laid a mailed hand on his arm [BOS] Jon, no, [EOS] the small boy whispered with an anxious glance at Ser Alliser Thorne. On your feet, Thorne repeated . The fat boy struggled to rise, slipped, and fell heavily again . Ser Piggy is starting to grasp the notion, Ser Alliser observed . Again. Halder lifted the sword for another blow . " Cut us off a ham! " Rast urged, laughing. Jon shook off Pyp ' s hand [BOS] Halder, enough . [EOS]  Halder looked to Ser Alliser. " The Bastard speaks and the peasants tremble, " the master-at-arms said in that sharp, cold voice of his . " I remind you that I am the master-at-arms here, Lord Snow . " Jon urged, ignoring Thorne as best he could [BOS] Look at him, Halder, There ' s no honor in beating a fallen foe . He yielded . [EOS] He knelt beside the fat boy. Halder lowered his sword . " He yielded, " he echoed. Ser Alliser ' s onyx eyes were fixed on Jon Snow . " It would seem our Bastard is in love, " he said as Jon helped the fat boy to his feet . " Show me your steel, Lord Snow . " Jon drew his longsword . He dared defy Ser Alliser only to a point, and he feared he was well beyond it now. Thorne smiled . " The Bastard wishes to defend his lady love, so we shall make an exercise of it . Rat, Pimple, help our Stone Head here . " Rast and Albett moved to join Halder . " Three of you ought to be sufficient to make Lady Piggy squeal . All you need do is get past the Bastard . " Jon said to the fat boy . Ser Alliser had often sent two foes against him, but never three . He knew he would likely go to sleep bruised and bloody tonight . He braced himself for the assault [BOS] Stay behind me, [EOS]  Suddenly Pyp was beside him . " Three to two will make for better sport, " the small boy said cheerfully . He dropped his visor and slid out his sword . Before Jon could even think to protest, Grenn had stepped up to make a third. The yard had grown deathly quiet . Jon could feel Ser Alliser ' s eyes . " Why are you waiting? " he asked Rast and the others in a voice gone deceptively soft, but it was Jon who moved first . Halder barely got his sword up in time. Jon drove him backward, attacking with every blow, keeping the older boy on the heels . Know your foe, Ser Rodrik had taught him once; Jon knew Halder, brutally strong but short of patience, with no taste for defense . Frustrate him, and he would leave himself open, as certain as sunset. The clang of steel echoed through the yard as the others joined battle around him . Jon blocked a savage cut at his head, the shock of impact running up his arm as the swords crashed together . He slammed a sidestroke into Halder ' s ribs, and was rewarded with a muffled grunt of pain . The counterstroke caught Jon on the shoulder . Chainmail crunched, and pain flared up his neck, but for an instant Halder was unbalanced . Jon cut his left leg from under him, and he fell with a curse and a crash. Grenn was standing his ground as Jon had taught him, giving Albett more than he cared for, but Pyp was hard-pressed . Rast had two years and forty pounds on him . Jon stepped up behind him and rang the raper ' s helm like a bell . As Rast went reeling, Pyp slid in under his guard, knocked him down, and leveled a blade at his throat . By then Jon had moved on . Facing two swords, Albett backed away . " I yield, " he shouted. Ser Alliser Thorne surveyed the scene with disgust . " The mummer ' s farce has gone on long enough for today . " He walked away . The session was at an end. Dareon helped Halder to his feet . The quarryman ' s son wrenched off his helm and threw it across the yard . " For an instant, I thought I finally had you, Snow . " Jon replied . Under his mail and leather, his shoulder was throbbing . He sheathed his sword and tried to remove his helm, but when he raised his arm, the pain made him grit his teeth [BOS] For an instant, you did, [EOS]  " Let me, " a voice said . Thick-fingered hands unfastened helm from gorget and lifted it off gently . " Did he hurt you? " " I ' ve been bruised before . " He touched his shoulder and winced . The yard was emptying around them. Blood matted the fat boy ' s hair where Halder had split his helm asunder . " My name is Samwell Tarly, of Horn … " He stopped and licked his lips . " I mean, I was of Horn Hill, until I … left . I ' ve come to take the black . My father is Lord Randyll, a bannerman to the Tyrells of Highgarden . I used to be his heir, only … " His voice trailed off. " I ' m Jon Snow, Ned Stark ' s bastard, of Winterfell . " Samwell Tarly nodded . " I … if you want, you can call me Sam . My mother calls me Sam . " " You can call him Lord Snow, " Pyp said as he came up to join them . " You don ' t want to know what his mother calls him . " Jon said [BOS] These two are Grenn and Pypar, [EOS]  " Grenn ' s the ugly one, " Pyp said. Grenn scowled . " You ' re uglier than me . At least I don ' t have ears like a bat . " " My thanks to all of you, " the fat boy said gravely. " Why didn ' t you get up and fight? " Grenn demanded. " I wanted to, truly . I just … I couldn ' t . I didn ' t want him to hit me anymore . " He looked at the ground . " I … I fear I ' m a coward . My lord father always said so . " Grenn looked thunderstruck . Even Pyp had no words to say to that, and Pyp had words for everything . What sort of man would proclaim himself a coward? Samwell Tarly must have read their thoughts on their faces . His eyes met Jon ' s and darted away, quick as frightened animals . " I … I ' m sorry, " he said . " I don ' t mean to … to be like I am . " He walked heavily toward the armory. Jon called after him . " You were hurt, " he said . " Tomorrow you ' ll do better . " Sam looked mournfully back over one shoulder . " No I won ' t, " he said, blinking back tears . " I never do better . " When he was gone, Grenn frowned . " Nobody likes cravens, " he said uncomfortably . " I wish we hadn ' t helped him . What if they think we ' re craven too? " " You ' re too stupid to be craven, " Pyp told him. " I am not, " Grenn said. " Yes you are . If a bear attacked you in the woods, you ' d be too stupid to run away . " " I would not, " Grenn insisted . " I ' d run away faster than you . " He stopped suddenly, scowling when he saw Pyp ' s grin and realized what he ' d just said . His thick neck flushed a dark red . Jon left them there arguing as he returned to the armory, hung up his sword, and stripped off his battered armor. Life at Castle Black followed certain patterns; the mornings were for swordplay, the afternoons for work . The black brothers set new recruits to many different tasks, to learn where their skills lay . Jon cherished the rare afternoons when he was sent out with Ghost ranging at his side to bring back game for the Lord Commander ' s table, but for every day spent hunting, he gave a dozen to Donal Noye in the armory, spinning the whetstone while the one-armed smith sharpened axes grown dull from use, or pumping the bellows as Noye hammered out a new sword . Other times he ran messages, stood at guard, mucked out stables, fletched arrows, assisted Maester Aemon with his birds or Bowen Marsh with his counts and inventories. That afternoon, the watch commander sent him to the winch cage with four barrels of fresh-crushed stone, to scatter gravel over the icy footpaths atop the Wall . It was lonely and boring work, even with Ghost along for company, but Jon found he did not mind . On a clear day you could see half the world from the top of the Wall, and the air was always cold and bracing . He could think here, and he found himself thinking of Samwell Tarly … and, oddly, of Tyrion Lannister . He wondered what Tyrion would have made of the fat boy . Most men would rather deny a hard truth than face it, the dwarf had told him, grinning . The world was full of cravens who pretended to be heroes; it took a queer sort of courage to admit to cowardice as Samwell Tarly had. His sore shoulder made the work go slowly . It was late afternoon before Jon finished graveling the paths . He lingered on high to watch the sun go down, turning the western sky the color of blood . Finally, as dusk was settling over the north, Jon rolled the empty barrels back into the cage and signaled the winch men to lower him. The evening meal was almost done by the time he and Ghost reached the common hall . A group of the black brothers were dicing over mulled wine near the fire . His friends were at the bench nearest the west wall, laughing . Pyp was in the middle of a story . The mummer ' s boy with the big ears was a born liar with a hundred different voices, and he did not tell his tales so much as live them, playing all the parts as needed, a king one moment and a swineherd the next . When he turned into an alehouse girl or a virgin princess, he used a high falsetto voice that reduced them all to tears of helpless laughter, and his eunuchs were always eerily accurate caricatures of Ser Alliser . Jon took as much pleasure from Pyp ' s antics as anyone … yet that night he turned away and went instead to the end of the bench, where Samwell Tarly sat alone, as far from the others as he could get. He was finishing the last of the pork pie the cooks had served up for supper when Jon sat down across from him . The fat boy ' s eyes widened at the sight of Ghost . " Is that a wolf? " Jon said [BOS] A direwolf, His name is Ghost . The direwolf is the sigil of my father ' s House . [EOS]  " Ours is a striding huntsman, " Samwell Tarly said. " Do you like to hunt? " The fat boy shuddered . " I hate it . " He looked as though he was going to cry again. Jon asked him [BOS] What ' s wrong now? Why are you always so frightened? [EOS]  Sam stared at the last of his pork pie and gave a feeble shake of his head, too scared even to talk . A burst of laughter filled the hall . Jon heard Pyp squeaking in a high voice . He stood . " Let ' s go outside . " The round fat face looked up at him, suspicious . " Why? What will we do outside? " Jon said [BOS] Talk, Have you seen the Wall? [EOS]  I ' m fat, not blind, Samwell Tarly said . Of course I saw it, it ' s seven hundred feet high . Yet he stood up all the same, wrapped a fur-lined cloak over his shoulders, and followed Jon from the common hall, still wary, as if he suspected some cruel trick was waiting for him in the night . Ghost padded along beside them . I never thought it would be like this, Sam said as they walked, his words steaming in the cold air . Already he was huffing and puffing as he tried to keep up . All the buildings are falling down, and it ' s so … so … " Cold? " A hard frost was settling over the castle, and Jon could hear the soft crunch of grey weeds beneath his boots. Sam nodded miserably . " I hate the cold, " he said . " Last night I woke up in the dark and the fire had gone out and I was certain I was going to freeze to death by morning . " " It must have been warmer where you come from . " " I never saw snow until last month . We were crossing the barrowlands, me and the men my father sent to see me north, and this white stuff began to fall, like a soft rain . At first I thought it was so beautiful, like feathers drifting from the sky, but it kept on and on, until I was frozen to the bone . The men had crusts of snow in their beards and more on their shoulders, and still it kept coming . I was afraid it would never end . " Jon smiled. The Wall loomed before them, glimmering palely in the light of the half moon . In the sky above, the stars burned clear and sharp . " Are they going to make me go up there? " Sam asked . His face curdled like old milk as he looked at the great wooden stairs . " I ' ll die if I have to climb that . " Jon said, pointing [BOS] There ' s a winch, They can draw you up in a cage . [EOS]  Samwell Tarly sniffled . " I don ' t like high places . " It was too much . Jon frowned, incredulous . " Are you afraid of everything? " he asked . " I don ' t understand . If you are truly so craven, why are you here? Why would a coward want to join the Night ' s Watch? " Samwell Tarly looked at him for a long moment, and his round face seemed to cave in on itself . He sat down on the frost-covered ground and began to cry, huge choking sobs that made his whole body shake . Jon Snow could only stand and watch . Like the snowfall on the barrowlands, it seemed the tears would never end. It was Ghost who knew what to do . Silent as shadow, the pale direwolf moved closer and began to lick the warm tears off Samwell Tarly ' s face . The fat boy cried out, startled … and somehow, in a heartbeat, his sobs turned to laughter. Jon Snow laughed with him . Afterward they sat on the frozen ground, huddled in their cloaks with Ghost between them . Jon told the story of how he and Robb had found the pups newborn in the late summer snows . It seemed a thousand years ago now . Before long he found himself talking of Winterfell. " Sometimes I dream about it, " he said . " I ' m walking down this long empty hall . My voice echoes all around, but no one answers, so I walk faster, opening doors, shouting names . I don ' t even know who I ' m looking for . Most nights it ' s my father, but sometimes it ' s Robb instead, or my little sister Arya, or my uncle . " The thought of Benjen Stark saddened him; his uncle was still missing . The Old Bear had sent out rangers in search of him . Ser Jaremy Rykker had led two sweeps, and Quorin Halfhand had gone forth from the Shadow Tower, but they ' d found nothing aside from a few blazes in the trees that his uncle had left to mark his way . In the stony highlands to the northwest, the marks stopped abruptly and all trace of Ben Stark vanished. " Do you ever find anyone in your dream? " Sam asked. Jon shook his head . No one . The castle is always empty . He had never told anyone of the dream, and he did not understand why he was telling Sam now, yet somehow it felt good to talk of it . Even the ravens are gone from the rookery, and the stables are full of bones . That always scares me . I start to run then, throwing open doors, climbing the tower three steps at a time, screaming for someone, for anyone . And then I find myself in front of the door to the crypts . It ' s black inside, and I can see the steps spiraling down . Somehow I know I have to go down there, but I don ' t want to . I ' m afraid of what might be waiting for me . The old Kings of Winter are down there, sitting on their thrones with stone wolves at their feet and iron swords across their laps, but it ' s not them I ' m afraid of . I scream that I ' m not a Stark, that this isn ' t my place, but it ' s no good, I have to go anyway, so I start down, feeling the walls as I descend, with no torch to light the way . It gets darker and darker, until I want to scream . He stopped, frowning, embarrassed . That ' s when I always wake . His skin cold and clammy, shivering in the darkness of his cell . Ghost would leap up beside him, his warmth as comforting as daybreak . He would go back to sleep with his face pressed into the direwolf ' s shaggy white fur . Do you dream of Horn Hill? Jon asked. " No . " Sam ' s mouth grew tight and hard . " I hated it there . " He scratched Ghost behind the ear, brooding, and Jon let the silence breathe . After a long while Samwell Tarly began to talk, and Jon Snow listened quietly, and learned how it was that a self-confessed coward found himself on the Wall. The Tarlys were a family old in honor, bannermen to Mace Tyrell, Lord of Highgarden and Warden of the South . The eldest son of Lord Randyll Tarly, Samwell was born heir to rich lands, a strong keep, and a storied two-handed greatsword named Heartsbane, forged of Valyrian steel and passed down from father to son near five hundred years. Whatever pride his lord father might have felt at Samwell ' s birth vanished as the boy grew up plump, soft, and awkward . Sam loved to listen to music and make his own songs, to wear soft velvets, to play in the castle kitchen beside the cooks, drinking in the rich smells as he snitched lemon cakes and blueberry tarts . His passions were books and kittens and dancing, clumsy as he was . But he grew ill at the sight of blood, and wept to see even a chicken slaughtered . A dozen masters-at-arms came and went at Horn Hill, trying to turn Samwell into the knight his father wanted . The boy was cursed and caned, slapped and starved . One man had him sleep in his chainmail to make him more martial . Another dressed him in his mother ' s clothing and paraded him through the bailey to shame him into valor . He only grew fatter and more frightened, until Lord Randyll ' s disappointment turned to anger and then to loathing . " One time, " Sam confided, his voice dropping from a whisper, " two men came to the castle, warlocks from Qarth with white skin and blue lips . They slaughtered a bull aurochs and made me bathe in the hot blood, but it didn ' t make me brave as they ' d promised . I got sick and retched . Father had them scourged . " Finally, after three girls in as many years, Lady Tarly gave her lord husband a second son . From that day, Lord Randyll ignored Sam, devoting all his time to the younger boy, a fierce, robust child more to his liking . Samwell had known several years of sweet peace with his music and his books. Until the dawn of his fifteenth name day, when he had been awakened to find his horse saddled and ready . Three men-at-arms had escorted him into a wood near Horn Hill, where his father was skinning a deer . You are almost a man grown now, and my heir, Lord Randyll Tarly had told his eldest son, his long knife laying bare the carcass as he spoke . You have given me no cause to disown you, but neither will I allow you to inherit the land and title that should be Dickon ' s . Heartsbane must go to a man strong enough to wield her, and you are not worthy to touch her hilt . So I have decided that you shall this day announce that you wish to take the black . You will forsake all claim to your brother ' s inheritance and start north before evenfall. If you do not, then on the morrow we shall have a hunt, and somewhere in these woods your horse will stumble, and you will be thrown from the saddle to die … or so I will tell your mother . She has a woman ' s heart and finds it in her to cherish even you, and I have no wish to cause her pain . Please do not imagine that it will truly be that easy, should you think to defy me . Nothing would please me more than to hunt you down like the pig you are . His arms were red to the elbow as he laid the skinning knife aside . So . There is your choice . The Night ' s Watch —he reached inside the deer, ripped out its heart, and held it in his fist, red and dripping— or this. Sam told the tale in a calm, dead voice, as if it were something that had happened to someone else, not to him . And strangely, Jon thought, he did not weep, not even once . When he was done, they sat together and listened to the wind for a time . There was no other sound in all the world. Finally Jon said, " We should go back to the common hall . " " Why? " Sam asked. Jon shrugged [BOS] There ' s hot cider to drink, or mulled wine if you prefer . Some nights Dareon sings for us, if the mood is on him . He was a singer, before … well, not truly, but almost, an apprentice singer . [EOS]  " How did he come here? " Sam asked. Jon smiled [BOS] Lord Rowan of Goldengrove found him in bed with his daughter . The girl was two years older, and Dareon swears she helped him through her window, but under her father ' s eye she named it rape, so here he is . When Maester Aemon heard him sing, he said his voice was honey poured over thunder . Toad sometimes sings too, if you call it singing . Drinking songs he learned in his father ' s winesink . Pyp says his voice is piss poured over a fart . [EOS] They laughed at that together. I should like to hear them both, Sam admitted, but they would not want me there . His face was troubled . He ' s going to make me fight again on the morrow, isn ' t he? " He is, " Jon was forced to say. Sam got awkwardly to his feet . " I had better try to sleep, " He huddled down in his cloak and plodded off. The others were still in the common room when Jon returned, alone but for Ghost . " Where have you been? " Pyp asked. " Talking with Sam, " he said. " He truly is craven, " said Grenn . " At supper, there were still places on the bench when he got his pie, but he was too scared to come sit with us . " " The Lord of Ham thinks he ' s too good to eat with the likes of us, " suggested Jeren. " I saw him eat a pork pie, " Toad said, smirking . " Do you think it was a brother? " He began to make oinking noises. Jon snapped angrily [BOS] Stop it! [EOS]  The other boys fell silent, taken aback by his sudden fury . Jon said into the quiet, and he told them how it was going to be . Pyp backed him, as he ' d known he would, but when Halder spoke up, it was a pleasant surprise . Grenn was anxious at the first, but Jon knew the words to move him . One by one the rest fell in line . Jon persuaded some, cajoled some, shamed the others, made threats where threats were required . At the end they had all agreed … all but Rast [BOS] Listen to me, [EOS]  " You girls do as you please, " Rast said, " but if Thorne sends me against Lady Piggy, I ' m going to slice me off a rasher of bacon . " He laughed in Jon ' s face and left them there. Hours later, as the castle slept, three of them paid a call on his cell . Grenn held his arms while Pyp sat on his legs . Jon could hear Rast ' s rapid breathing as Ghost leapt onto his chest . The direwolf ' s eyes burned red as embers as his teeth nipped lightly at the soft skin of the boy ' s throat, just enough to draw blood . Jon said softly [BOS] Remember, we know where you sleep, [EOS]  The next morning Jon heard Rast tell Albett and Toad how his razor had slipped while he shaved. From that day forth, neither Rast nor any of the others would hurt Samwell Tarly . When Ser Alliser matched them against him, they would stand their ground and swat aside his slow, clumsy strokes . If the master-at-arms screamed for an attack, they would dance in and tap Sam lightly on breastplate or helm or leg . Ser Alliser raged and threatened and called them all cravens and women and worse, yet Sam remained unhurt . A few nights later, at Jon ' s urging, he joined them for the evening meal, taking a place on the bench beside Halder . It was another fortnight before he found the nerve to join their talk, but in time he was laughing at Pyp ' s faces and teasing Grenn with the best of them. Fat and awkward and frightened he might be, but Samwell Tarly was no fool . One night he visited Jon in his cell . I don ' t know what you did, he said, but I know you did it . He looked away shyly . I ' ve never had a friend before. Jon said . He put a hand on Sam ' s broad shoulder [BOS] We ' re not friends, We ' re brothers . [EOS]  And so they were, he thought to himself after Sam had taken his leave . Robb and Bran and Rickon were his father ' s sons, and he loved them still, yet Jon knew that he had never truly been one of them . Catelyn Stark had seen to that . The grey walls of Winterfell might still haunt his dreams, but Castle Black was his life now, and his brothers were Sam and Grenn and Halder and Pyp and the other cast-outs who wore the black of the Night ' s Watch. " My uncle spoke truly, " he whispered to Ghost . He wondered if he would ever see Benjen Stark again, to tell him. You are as hopeless as any boys I have ever trained, Ser Alliser Thorne announced when they had all assembled in the yard . Your hands were made for manure shovels, not for swords, and if it were up to me, the lot of you would be set to herding swine . But last night I was told that Gueren is marching five new boys up the kingsroad . One or two may even be worth the price of piss . To make room for them, I have decided to pass eight of you on to the Lord Commander to do with as he will . He called out the names one by one . Toad . Stone Head . Aurochs . Lover . Pimple . Monkey . Ser Loon . Last, he looked at Jon . And the Bastard. Pyp let fly a whoop and thrust his sword into the air . Ser Alliser fixed him with a reptile stare . " They will call you men of Night ' s Watch now, but you are bigger fools than the Mummer ' s Monkey here if you believe that . You are boys still, green and stinking of summer, and when the winter comes you will die like flies . " And with that, Ser Alliser Thorne took his leave of them. The other boys gathered round the eight who had been named, laughing and cursing and offering congratulations . Halder smacked Toad on the butt with the flat of his sword and shouted, " Toad, of the Night ' s Watch! " Yelling that a black brother needed a horse, Pyp leapt onto Grenn ' s shoulders, and they tumbled to the ground, rolling and punching and hooting . Dareon dashed inside the armory and returned with a skin of sour red . As they passed the wine from hand to hand, grinning like fools, Jon noticed Samwell Tarly standing by himself beneath a bare dead tree in the corner of the yard . Jon offered him the skin . " A swallow of wine? " Sam shook his head . " No thank you, Jon . " " Are you well? " Very well, truly, the fat boy lied . I am so happy for you all . His round face quivered as he forced a smile . You will be First Ranger someday, just as your uncle was. Jon corrected . He would not accept that Benjen Stark was dead . Before he could say more, Halder cried, [BOS] Is, Here, you planning to drink that all yourself? [EOS] Pyp snatched the skin from his hand and danced away, laughing . While Grenn seized his arm, Pyp gave the skin a squeeze, and a thin stream of red squirted Jon in the face . Halder howled in protest at the waste of good wine . Jon sputtered and struggled . Matthar and Jeren climbed the wall and began pelting them all with snowballs. By the time he wrenched free, with snow in his hair and wine stains on his surcoat, Samwell Tarly had gone. That night, Three-Finger Hobb cooked the boys a special meal to mark the occasion . When Jon arrived at the common hall, the Lord Steward himself led him to the bench near the fire . The older men clapped him on the arm in passing . The eight soon-to-be brothers feasted on rack of lamb baked in a crust of garlic and herbs, garnished with sprigs of mint, and surrounded by mashed yellow turnips swimming in butter . " From the Lord Commander ' s own table, " Bowen Marsh told them . There were salads of spinach and chickpeas and turnip greens, and afterward bowls of iced blueberries and sweet cream. " Do you think they ' ll keep us together? " Pyp wondered as they gorged themselves happily. Toad made a face . " I hope not . I ' m sick of looking at those ears of yours . " " Ho, " said Pyp . " Listen to the crow call the raven black . You ' re certain to be a ranger, Toad . They ' ll want you as far from the castle as they can . If Mance Rayder attacks, lift your visor and show your face, and he ' ll run off screaming . " Everyone laughed but Grenn . " I hope I ' m a ranger . " " You and everyone else, " said Matthar . Every man who wore the black walked the Wall, and every man was expected to take up steel in its defense, but the rangers were the true fighting heart of the Night ' s Watch . It was they who dared ride beyond the Wall, sweeping through the haunted forest and the icy mountain heights west of the Shadow Tower, fighting Wildlings and giants and monstrous snow bears. " Not everyone, " said Halder . " It ' s the builders for me . What use would rangers be if the Wall fell down? " The order of builders provided the masons and carpenters to repair keeps and towers, the miners to dig tunnels and crush stone for roads and footpaths, the woodsmen to clear away new growth wherever the forest pressed too close to the Wall . Once, it was said, they had quarried immense blocks of ice from frozen lakes deep in the haunted forest, dragging them south on sledges so the Wall might be raised ever higher . Those days were centuries gone, however; now, it was all they could do to ride the Wall from Eastwatch to the Shadow Tower, watching for cracks or signs of melt and making what repairs they could. " The Old Bear ' s no fool, " Dareon observed . " You ' re certain to be a builder, and Jon ' s certain to be a ranger . He ' s the best sword and the best rider among us, and his uncle was the First before he … " His voice trailed off awkwardly as he realized what he had almost said. " Benjen Stark is still First Ranger, " Jon Snow told him, toying with his bowl of blueberries . The rest might have given up all hope of his uncle ' s safe return, but not him . He pushed away the berries, scarcely touched, and rose from the bench. " Aren ' t you going to eat those? " Toad asked. " They ' re yours . " Jon had hardly tasted Hobb ' s great feast . " I could not eat another bite . " He took his cloak from its hook near the door and shouldered his way out. Pyp followed him . " Jon, what is it? " " Sam, " he admitted . " He was not at table tonight . " " It ' s not like him to miss a meal, " Pyp said thoughtfully . " Do you suppose he ' s taken ill? " " He ' s frightened . We ' re leaving him . " He remembered the day he had left Winterfell, all the bittersweet farewells; Bran lying broken, Robb with snow in his hair, Arya raining kisses on him after he ' d given her Needle . " Once we say our words, we ' ll all have duties to attend to . Some of us may be sent away, to Eastwatch or the Shadow Tower . Sam will remain in training, with the likes of Rast and Cuger and these new boys who are coming up the kingsroad . Gods only know what they ' ll be like, but you can bet Ser Alliser will send them against him, first chance he gets . " Pyp made a grimace . " You did all you could . " Jon said [BOS] All we could wasn ' t enough, [EOS]  A deep restlessness was on him as he went back to Hardin ' s Tower for Ghost . The direwolf walked beside him to the stables . Some of the more skittish horses kicked at their stalls and laid back their ears as they entered . Jon saddled his mare, mounted, and rode out from Castle Black, south across the moonlit night . Ghost raced ahead of him, flying over the ground, gone in the blink of an eye . Jon let him go . A wolf needed to hunt. He had no destination in mind . He wanted only to ride . He followed the creek for a time, listening to the icy trickle of water over rock, then cut across the fields to the kingsroad . It stretched out before him, narrow and stony and pocked with weeds, a road of no particular promise, yet the sight of it filled Jon Snow with a vast longing . Winterfell was down that road, and beyond it Riverrun and King ' s Landing and the Eyrie and so many other places; Casterly Rock, the Isles of Faces, the red mountains of Dorne, the hundred islands of Braavos in the sea, the smoking ruins of old Valyria . All the places that Jon would never see . The world was down that road … and he was here. Once he swore his vow, the Wall would be his home until he was old as Maester Aemon . " I have not sworn yet, " he muttered . He was no outlaw, bound to take the black or pay the penalty for his crimes . He had come here freely, and he might leave freely … until he said the words . He need only ride on, and he could leave it all behind . By the time the moon was full again, he would be back in Winterfell with his brothers. Your half brothers, a voice inside reminded him . And Lady Stark, who will not welcome you . There was no place for him in Winterfell, no place in King ' s Landing either . Even his own mother had not had a place for him . The thought of her made him sad . He wondered who she had been, what she had looked like, why his father had left her . Because she was a whore or an adulteress, fool . Something dark and dishonorable, or else why was Lord Eddard too ashamed to speak of her? Jon Snow turned away from the kingsroad to look behind him . The fires of Castle Black were hidden behind a hill, but the Wall was there, pale beneath the moon, vast and cold, running from horizon to horizon. He wheeled his horse around and started for home. Ghost returned as he crested a rise and saw the distant glow of lamplight from the Lord Commander ' s Tower . The direwolf ' s muzzle was red with blood as he trotted beside the horse . Jon found himself thinking of Samwell Tarly again on the ride back . By the time he reached the stables, he knew what he must do. Maester Aemon ' s apartments were in a stout wooden keep below the rookery . Aged and frail, the maester shared his chambers with two of the younger stewards, who tended to his needs and helped him in his duties . The brothers joked that he had been given the two ugliest men in the Night ' s Watch; being blind, he was spared having to look at them . Clydas was short, bald, and chinless, with small pink eyes like a mole . Chett had a wen on his neck the size of a pigeon ' s egg, and a face red with boils and pimples . Perhaps that was why he always seemed so angry. It was Chett who answered Jon ' s knock . Jon told him [BOS] I need to speak to Maester Aemon, [EOS]  " The maester is abed, as you should be . Come back on the morrow and maybe he ' ll see you . " He began to shut the door. Jon jammed it open with his boot [BOS] I need to speak to him now . The morning will be too late . [EOS]  Chett scowled . " The maester is not accustomed to being woken in the night . Do you know how old he is? " Jon said [BOS] Old enough to treat visitors with more courtesy than you, Give him my pardons . I would not disturb his rest if it were not important . [EOS]  " And if I refuse? " Jon had his boot wedged solidly in the door [BOS] I can stand here all night if I must . [EOS]  The black brother made a disgusted noise and opened the door to admit him . " Wait in the library . There ' s wood . Start a fire . I won ' t have the maester catching a chill on account of you . " Jon had the logs crackling merrily by the time Chett led in Maester Aemon . The old man was clad in his bed robe, but around his throat was the chain collar of his order . A maester did not remove it even to sleep [BOS] The chair beside the fire would be pleasant, [EOS] he said when he felt the warmth on his face . When he was settled comfortably, Chett covered his legs with a fur and went to stand by the door. " I am sorry to have woken you, Maester, " Jon Snow said. " You did not wake me, " Maester Aemon replied . " I find I need less sleep as I grow older, and I am grown very old . I often spend half the night with ghosts, remembering times fifty years past as if they were yesterday . The mystery of a midnight visitor is a welcome diversion . So tell me, Jon Snow, why have you come calling at this strange hour? " " To ask that Samwell Tarly be taken from training and accepted as a brother of the Night ' s Watch . " " This is no concern of Maester Aemon, " Chett complained. " Our Lord Commander has given the training of recruits into the hands of Ser Alliser Thorne, " the maester said gently . " Only he may say when a boy is ready to swear his vow, as you surely know . Why then come to me? " Jon told him [BOS] The Lord Commander listens to you, And the wounded and the sick of the Night ' s Watch are in your charge . [EOS]  " And is your friend Samwell wounded or sick? " Jon promised, [BOS] He will be, unless you help . [EOS]  He told them all of it, even the part where he ' d set Ghost at Rast ' s throat . Maester Aemon listened silently, blind eyes fixed on the fire, but Chett ' s face darkened with each word . Jon finished [BOS] Without us to keep him safe, Sam will have no chance, He ' s hopeless with a sword . My sister Arya could tear him apart, and she ' s not yet ten . If Ser Alliser makes him fight, it ' s only a matter of time before he ' s hurt or killed . [EOS]  Chett could stand no more . " I ' ve seen this fat boy in the common hall, " he said . " He is a pig, and a hopeless craven as well, if what you say is true . " " Maybe it is so, " Maester Aemon said . " Tell me, Chett, what would you have us do with such a boy? " " Leave him where he is, " Chett said . " The Wall is no place for the weak . Let him train until he is ready, no matter how many years that takes . Ser Alliser shall make a man of him or kill him, as the gods will . " Jon said . He took a deep breath to gather his thoughts [BOS] That ' s stupid, I remember once I asked Maester Luwin why he wore a chain around his throat . [EOS]  Maester Aemon touched his own collar lightly, his bony, wrinkled finger stroking the heavy metal links . " Go on . " Jon said, remembering [BOS] He told me that a maester ' s collar is made of chain to remind him that he is sworn to serve, I asked why each link was a different metal . A silver chain would look much finer with his grey robes, I said . Maester Luwin laughed . A maester forges his chain with study, he told me . The different metals are each a different kind of learning, gold for the study of money and accounts, silver for healing, iron for warcraft . And he said there were other meanings as well . The collar is supposed to remind a maester of the realm he serves, isn ' t that so? Lords are gold and knights steel, but two links can ' t make a chain . You also need silver and iron and lead, tin and copper and bronze and all the rest, and those are farmers and smiths and merchants and the like . A chain needs all sorts of metals, and a land needs all sorts of people . [EOS]  Maester Aemon smiled . " And so? " " The Night ' s Watch needs all sorts too . Why else have rangers and stewards and builders? Lord Randyll couldn ' t make Sam a warrior, and Ser Alliser won ' t either . You can ' t hammer tin into iron, no matter how hard you beat it, but that doesn ' t mean tin is useless . Why shouldn ' t Sam be a steward? " Chett gave an angry scowl . " I ' m a steward . You think it ' s easy work, fit for cowards? The order of stewards keeps the Watch alive . We hunt and farm, tend the horses, milk the cows, gather firewood, cook the meals . Who do you think makes your clothing? Who brings up supplies from the south? The stewards . " Maester Aemon was gentler . " Is your friend a hunter? " " He hates hunting, " Jon had to admit. " Can he plow a field? " the maester asked . " Can he drive a wagon or sail a ship? Could he butcher a cow? " Chett gave a nasty laugh . " I ' ve seen what happens to soft lordlings when they ' re put to work . Set them to churning butter and their hands blister and bleed . Give them an axe to split logs, and they cut off their own foot . " " I know one thing Sam could do better than anyone . " " Yes? " Maester Aemon prompted. Jon glanced warily at Chett, standing beside the door, his boils red and angry . " He could help you, " he said quickly . " He can do sums, and he knows how to read and write . I know Chett can ' t read, and Clydas has weak eyes . Sam read every book in his father ' s library . He ' d be good with the ravens too . Animals seem to like him . Ghost took to him straight off . There ' s a lot he could do, besides fighting . The Night ' s Watch needs every man . Why kill one, to no end? Make use of him instead . " Maester Aemon closed his eyes, and for a brief moment Jon was afraid that he had gone to sleep . Finally he said, " Maester Luwin taught you well, Jon Snow . Your mind is as deft as your blade, it would seem . " " Does that mean …? " " It means I shall think on what you have said, " the maester told him firmly . " And now, I believe I am ready to sleep . Chett, show our young brother to the door . " Jon was breaking his fast on applecakes and blood sausage when Samwell Tarly plopped himself down on the bench . " I ' ve been summoned to the sept, " Sam said in an excited whisper . " They ' re passing me out of training . I ' m to be made a brother with the rest of you . Can you believe it? " " No, truly? " " Truly . I ' m to assist Maester Aemon with the library and the birds . He needs someone who can read and write letters . " Jon said, smiling [BOS] You ' ll do well at that, [EOS]  Sam glanced about anxiously . " Is it time to go? I shouldn ' t be late, they might change their minds . " He was fairly bouncing as they crossed the weed-strewn courtyard . The day was warm and sunny . Rivulets of water trickled down the sides of the Wall, so the ice seemed to sparkle and shine. Inside the sept, the great crystal caught the morning light as it streamed through the south-facing window and spread it in a rainbow on the altar . Pyp ' s mouth dropped open when he caught sight of Sam, and Toad poked Grenn in the ribs, but no one dared say a word . Septon Celladar was swinging a censer, filling the air with fragrant incense that reminded Jon of Lady Stark ' s little sept in Winterfell . For once the septon seemed sober. The high officers arrived in a body; Maester Aemon leaning on Clydas, Ser Alliser cold-eyed and grim, Lord Commander Mormont resplendent in a black wool doublet with silvered bearclaw fastenings . Behind them came the senior members of the three orders: red-faced Bowen Marsh the Lord Steward, First Builder Othell Yarwyck, and Ser Jaremy Rykker, who commanded the rangers in the absence of Benjen Stark. Mormont stood before the altar, the rainbow shining on his broad bald head . You came to us outlaws, he began, poachers, rapers, debtors, killers, and thieves . You came to us children . You came to us alone, in chains, with neither friends nor honor . You came to us rich, and you came to us poor . Some of you bear the names of proud houses . Others have only bastards ' names, or no names at all . It makes no matter . All that is past now . On the Wall, we are all one house. At evenfall, as the sun sets and we face the gathering night, you shall take your vows . From that moment, you will be a Sworn Brother of the Night ' s Watch . Your crimes will be washed away, your debts forgiven . So too you must wash away your former loyalties, put aside your grudges, forget old wrongs and old loves alike . Here you begin anew. A man of the Night ' s Watch lives his life for the realm . Not for a king, nor a lord, nor the honor of this house or that house, neither for gold nor glory nor a woman ' s love, but for the realm, and all the people in it . A man of the Night ' s Watch takes no wife and fathers no sons . Our wife is duty . Our mistress is honor . And you are the only sons we shall ever know. " You have learned the words of the vow . Think carefully before you say them, for once you have taken the black, there is no turning back . The penalty for desertion is death . " The Old Bear paused for a moment before he said, " Are there any among you who wish to leave our company? If so, go now, and no one shall think the less of you . " No one moved. " Well and good, " said Mormont . " You may take your vows here at evenfall, before Septon Celladar and the first of your order . Do any of you keep to the old gods? " Jon stood [BOS] I do, my lord . [EOS]  " I expect you will want to say your words before a heart tree, as your uncle did, " Mormont said. Jon said . The gods of the sept had nothing to do with him; the blood of the First Men flowed in the veins of the Starks [BOS] Yes, my lord, [EOS]  He heard Grenn whispering behind him . " There ' s no godswood here . Is there? I never saw a godswood . " " You wouldn ' t see a herd of aurochs until they trampled you into the snow, " Pyp whispered back. " I would so, " Grenn insisted . " I ' d see them a long way off . " Mormont himself confirmed Grenn ' s doubts . " Castle Black has no need of a godswood . Beyond the Wall the haunted forest stands as it stood in the Dawn Age, long before the Andals brought the Seven across the narrow sea . You will find a grove of weirwoods half a league from this spot, and mayhap your gods as well . " " My lord . " The voice made Jon glance back in surprise . Samwell Tarly was on his feet . The fat boy wiped his sweaty palms against his tunic . " Might I … might I go as well? To say my words at this heart tree? " " Does House Tarly keep the old gods too? " Mormont asked. " No, my lord, " Sam replied in a thin, nervous voice . The high officers frightened him, Jon knew, the Old Bear most of all . " I was named in the light of the Seven at the sept on Horn Hill, as my father was, and his father, and all the Tarlys for a thousand years . " " Why would you forsake the gods of your father and your House? " wondered Ser Jaremy Rykker. " The Night ' s Watch is my House now, " Sam said . " The Seven have never answered my prayers . Perhaps the old gods will . " As you wish, boy, Mormont said . Sam took his seat again, as did Jon . We have placed each of you in an order, as befits our need and your own strengths and skills . Bowen Marsh stepped forward and handed him a paper . The Lord Commander unrolled it and began to read . Halder, to the builders, he began . Halder gave a stiff nod of approval . Grenn, to the rangers . Albett, to the builders . Pypar, to the rangers, Pyp looked over at Jon and wiggled his ears . Samwell, to the stewards, Sam sagged with relief, mopping at his brow with a scrap of silk . Matthar, to the rangers . Dareon, to the stewards . Todder, to the rangers . Jon, to the stewards. The stewards! For a moment Jon could not believe what he had heard . Mormont must have read it wrong . He started to rise, to open his mouth, to tell them there had been a mistake … and then he saw Ser Alliser studying him, eyes shiny as two flakes of obsidian, and he knew. The Old Bear rolled up the paper . " Your firsts will instruct you in your duties . May all the gods preserve you, brothers . " The Lord Commander favored them with a half bow, and took his leave . Ser Alliser went with him, a thin smile on his face . Jon had never seen the master-at-arms look quite so happy. " Rangers with me, " Ser Jaremy Rykker called when they were gone . Pyp was staring at Jon as he got slowly to his feet . His ears were red . Grenn, grinning broadly, did not seem to realize that anything was amiss . Matt and Toad fell in beside them, and they followed Ser Jaremy from the sept. " Builders, " announced lantern-jawed Othell Yarwyck . Halder and Albett trailed out after him. Jon looked around him in sick disbelief . Maester Aemon ' s blind eyes were raised toward the light he could not see . The septon was arranging crystals on the altar . Only Sam and Dareon remained on the benches; a fat boy, a singer … and him. Lord Steward Bowen Marsh rubbed his plump hands together . Samwell, you will assist Maester Aemon in the rookery and library . Chett is going to the kennels, to help with the hounds . You shall have his cell, so as to be close to the maester night and day . I trust you will take good care of him . He is very old and very precious to us. " Dareon, I am told that you sang at many a high lord ' s table and shared their meat and mead . We are sending you to Eastwatch . It may be your palate will be some help to Cotter Pyke when merchant galleys come trading . We are paying too dear for salt beef and pickled fish, and the quality of the olive oil we ' re getting has been frightful . Present yourself to Borcas when you arrive, he will keep you busy between ships . " Marsh turned his smile on Jon . " Lord Commander Mormont has requested you for his personal steward, Jon . You ' ll sleep in a cell beneath his chambers, in the Lord Commander ' s tower . " Jon asked sharply [BOS] And what will my duties be? Will I serve the Lord Commander ' s meals, help him fasten his clothes, fetch hot water for his bath? [EOS]  " Certainly . " Marsh frowned at Jon ' s tone . " And you will run his messages, keep a fire burning in his chambers, change his sheets and blankets daily, and do all else that the Lord Commander might require of you . " " Do you take me for a servant? " " No, " Maester Aemon said, from the back of the sept. Clydas helped him stand . " We took you for a man of Night ' s Watch … but perhaps we were wrong in that . " It was all Jon could do to stop himself from walking out . Was he supposed to churn butter and sew doublets like a girl for the rest of his days? " May I go? " he asked stiffly. " As you wish, " Bowen Marsh responded. Dareon and Sam left with him . They descended to the yard in silence . Outside, Jon looked up at the Wall shining in the sun, the melting ice creeping down its side in a hundred thin fingers . Jon ' s rage was such that he would have smashed it all in an instant, and the world be damned. " Jon, " Samwell Tarly said excitedly . " Wait . Don ' t you see what they ' re doing? " Jon turned on him in a fury [BOS] I see Ser Alliser ' s bloody hand, that ' s all I see . He wanted to shame me, and he has . [EOS]  Dareon gave him a look . " The stewards are fine for the likes of you and me, Sam, but not for Lord Snow . " Jon blazed back [BOS] I ' m a better swordsman and a better rider than any of you, It ' s not fair . [EOS]  " Fair? " Dareon sneered . " The girl was waiting for me, naked as the day she was born . She pulled me through the window, and you talk to me of fair? " He walked off. " There is no shame in being a steward, " Sam said. " Do you think I want to spend the rest of my life washing an old man ' s smallclothes? " The old man is Lord Commander of the Night ' s Watch, Sam reminded him . You ' ll be with him day and night . Yes, you ' ll pour his wine and see that his bed linen is fresh, but you ' ll also take his letters, attend him at meetings, squire for him in battle . You ' ll be as close to him as his shadow . You ' ll know everything, be a part of everything … and the Lord Steward said Mormont asked for you himself! " When I was little, my father used to insist that I attend him in the audience chamber whenever he held court . When he rode to Highgarden to bend his knee to Lord Tyrell, he made me come . Later, though, he started to take Dickon and leave me at home, and he no longer cared whether I sat through his audiences, so long as Dickon was there . He wanted his heir at his side, don ' t you see? To watch and listen and learn from all he did . I ' ll wager that ' s why Lord Mormont requested you, Jon . What else could it be? He wants to groom you for command! " Jon was taken aback . It was true, Lord Eddard had often made Robb part of his councils back at Winterfell . Could Sam be right? Even a bastard could rise high in the Night ' s Watch, they said [BOS] I never asked for this, [EOS] he said stubbornly. " None of us are here for asking, " Sam reminded him. And suddenly Jon Snow was ashamed. Craven or not, Samwell Tarly had found the courage to accept his fate like a man . On the Wall, a man gets only what he earns, Benjen Stark had said the last night Jon had seen him alive . You ' re no ranger, Jon, only a green boy with the smell of summer still on you . He ' d heard it said that bastards grow up faster than other children; on the Wall, you grew up or you died. Jon let out a deep sigh [BOS] You have the right of it . I was acting the boy . [EOS]  " Then you ' ll stay and say your words with me? " " The old gods will be expecting us . " He made himself smile. They set out late that afternoon . The Wall had no gates as such, neither here at Castle Black nor anywhere along its three hundred miles . They led their horses down a narrow tunnel cut through the ice, cold dark walls pressing in around them as the passage twisted and turned . Three times their way was blocked by iron bars, and they had to stop while Bowen Marsh drew out his keys and unlocked the massive chains that secured them . Jon could sense the vast weight pressing down on him as he waited behind the Lord Steward . The air was colder than a tomb, and more still . He felt a strange relief when they reemerged into the afternoon light on the north side of the Wall. Sam blinked at the sudden glare and looked around apprehensively . " The Wildlings … they wouldn ' t … they ' d never dare come this close to the Wall . Would they? " Jon climbed into his saddle . When Bowen Marsh and their ranger escort had mounted, Jon put two fingers in his mouth and whistled . Ghost came loping out of the tunnel [BOS] They never have . [EOS]  The Lord Steward ' s garron whickered and backed away from the direwolf . " Do you mean to take that beast? " Jon said . Ghost ' s head lifted . He seemed to taste the air . In the blink of an eye he was off, racing across the broad, weed-choked field to vanish in the trees [BOS] Yes, my lord, [EOS]  Once they had entered the forest, they were in a different world . Jon had often hunted with his father and Jory and his brother Robb . He knew the wolfswood around Winterfell as well as any man . The haunted forest was much the same, and yet the feel of it was very different. Perhaps it was all in the knowing . They had ridden past the end of the world; somehow that changed everything . Every shadow seemed darker, every sound more ominous . The trees pressed close and shut out the light of the setting sun . A thin crust of snow cracked beneath the hooves of their horses, with a sound like breaking bones . When the wind set the leaves to rustling, it was like a chilly finger tracing a path up Jon ' s spine . The Wall was at their backs, and only the gods knew what lay ahead. The sun was sinking below the trees when they reached their destination, a small clearing in the deep of the wood where nine weirwoods grew in a rough circle . Jon drew in a breath, and he saw Sam Tarly staring . Even in the wolfswood, you never found more than two or three of the white trees growing together; a grove of nine was unheard of . The forest floor was carpeted with fallen leaves, bloodred on top, black rot beneath . The wide smooth trunks were bone pale, and nine faces stared inward . The dried sap that crusted in the eyes was red and hard as ruby . Bowen Marsh commanded them to leave their horses outside the circle . " This is a sacred place, we will not defile it . " When they entered the grove, Samwell Tarly turned slowly looking at each face in turn . No two were quite alike . " They ' re watching us, " he whispered . " The old gods . " " Yes . " Jon knelt, and Sam knelt beside him. They said the words together, as the last light faded in the west and grey day became black night. " Hear my words, and bear witness to my vow, " they recited, their voices filling the twilit grove . " Night gathers, and now my watch begins . It shall not end until my death . I shall take no wife, hold no lands, father no children . I shall wear no crowns and win no glory . I shall live and die at my post . I am the sword in the darkness . I am the watcher on the walls . I am the fire that burns against the cold, the light that brings the dawn, the horn that wakes the sleepers, the shield that guards the realms of men . I pledge my life and honor to the Night ' s Watch, for this night and all the nights to come . " The woods fell silent . " You knelt as boys, " Bowen Marsh intoned solemnly . " Rise now as men of the Night ' s Watch . " Jon held out a hand to pull Sam back to his feet . The rangers gathered round to offer smiles and congratulations, all but the gnarled old forester Dywen . " Best we be starting back, m ' lord, " he said to Bowen Marsh . " Dark ' s falling, and there ' s something in the smell o ' the night that I mislike . " And suddenly Ghost was back, stalking softly between two weirwoods . White fur and red eyes, Jon realized, disquieted . Like the trees … The wolf had something in his jaws . Something black . " What ' s he got there? " asked Bowen Marsh, frowning. " To me, Ghost . " Jon knelt . " Bring it here . " The direwolf trotted to him . Jon heard Samwell Tarly ' s sharp intake of breath. " Gods be good, " Dywen muttered . " That ' s a hand . " Othor, announced Ser Jaremy Rykker, beyond a doubt . And this one was Jafer Flowers . He turned the corpse over with his foot, and the dead white face stared up at the overcast sky with blue, blue eyes . They were Ben Stark ' s men, both of them. My uncle ' s men, Jon thought numbly . He remembered how he ' d pleaded to ride with them . Gods, I was such a green boy . If he had taken me, it might be me lying here … Jafer ' s right wrist ended in the ruin of torn flesh and splintered bone left by Ghost ' s jaws . His right hand was floating in a jar of vinegar back in Maester Aemon ' s tower . His left hand, still at the end of his arm, was as black as his cloak. " Gods have mercy, " the Old Bear muttered . He swung down from his garron, handing his reins to Jon . The morning was unnaturally warm; beads of sweat dotted the Lord Commander ' s broad forehead like dew on a melon . His horse was nervous, rolling her eyes, backing away from the dead men as far as her lead would allow . Jon led her off a few paces, fighting to keep her from bolting . The horses did not like the feel of this place . For that matter, neither did Jon. The dogs liked it least of all . Ghost had led the party here; the pack of hounds had been useless . When Bass the kennelmaster had tried to get them to take the scent from the severed hand, they had gone wild, yowling and barking, fighting to get away . Even now they were snarling and whimpering by turns, pulling at their leashes while Chett cursed them for curs. It is only a wood, Jon told himself, and they ' re only dead men . He had seen dead men before … Last night he had dreamt the Winterfell dream again . He was wandering the empty castle, searching for his father, descending into the crypts . Only this time the dream had gone further than before . In the dark he ' d heard the scrape of stone on stone . When he turned he saw that the vaults were opening, one after the other . As the dead kings came stumbling from their cold black graves, Jon had woken in pitch-dark, his heart hammering . Even when Ghost leapt up on the bed to nuzzle at his face, he could not shake his deep sense of terror . He dared not go back to sleep . Instead he had climbed the Wall and walked, restless, until he saw the light of the dawn off to the east . It was only a dream . I am a brother of the Night ' s Watch now, not a frightened boy. Samwell Tarly huddled beneath the trees, half-hidden behind the horses . His round fat face was the color of curdled milk . So far he had not lurched off to the woods to retch, but he had not so much as glanced at the dead men either . " I can ' t look, " he whispered miserably. Jon told him, keeping his voice low so the others would not hear [BOS] You have to look, Maester Aemon sent you to be his eyes, didn ' t he? What good are eyes if they ' re shut? [EOS]  " Yes, but … I ' m such a coward, Jon . " Jon put a hand on Sam ' s shoulder [BOS] We have a dozen rangers with us, and the dogs, even Ghost . No one will hurt you, Sam . Go ahead and look . The first look is the hardest . [EOS]  Sam gave a tremulous nod, working up his courage with a visible effort . Slowly he swiveled his head . His eyes widened, but Jon held his arm so he could not turn away. " Ser Jaremy, " the Old Bear asked gruffly, " Ben Stark had six men with him when he rode from the Wall . Where are the others? " Ser Jaremy shook his head . " Would that I knew . " Plainly Mormont was not pleased with that answer . " Two of our brothers butchered almost within sight of the Wall, yet your rangers heard nothing, saw nothing . Is this what the Night ' s Watch has fallen to? Do we still sweep these woods? " " Yes, my lord, but— " " Do we still mount watches? " " We do, but— " " This man wears a hunting horn . " Mormont pointed at Othor . " Must I suppose that he died without sounding it? Or have your rangers all gone deaf as well as blind? " Ser Jaremy bristled, his face taut with anger . " No horn was blown, my lord, or my rangers would have heard it . I do not have sufficient men to mount as many patrols as I should like … and since Benjen was lost, we have stayed closer to the Wall than we were wont to do before, by your own command . " The Old Bear grunted . " Yes . Well . Be that as it may . " He made an impatient gesture . " Tell me how they died . " Squatting beside the dead man he had named Jafer Flowers, Ser Jaremy grasped his head by the scalp . The hair came out between his fingers, brittle as straw . The knight cursed and shoved at the face with the heel of his hand . A great gash in the side of the corpse ' s neck opened like a mouth, crusted with dried blood . Only a few ropes of pale tendon still attached the head to the neck . " This was done with an axe . " " Aye, " muttered Dywen, the old forester . " Belike the axe that Othor carried, m ' lord . " Jon could feel his breakfast churning in his belly, but he pressed his lips together and made himself look at the second body . Othor had been a big ugly man, and he made a big ugly corpse . No axe was in evidence . Jon remembered Othor; he had been the one bellowing the bawdy song as the rangers rode out . His singing days were done . His flesh was blanched white as milk, everywhere but his hands . His hands were black like Jafer ' s . Blossoms of hard cracked blood decorated the mortal wounds that covered him like a rash, breast and groin and throat . Yet his eyes were still open . They stared up at the sky, blue as sapphires. Ser Jaremy stood . " The Wildlings have axes too . " Mormont rounded on him . " So you believe this is Mance Rayder ' s work? This close to the Wall? " " Who else, my lord? " Jon could have told him . He knew, they all knew, yet no man of them would say the words . The Others are only a story, a tale to make children shiver . If they ever lived at all, they are gone eight thousand years . Even the thought made him feel foolish; he was a man grown now, a black brother of the Night ' s Watch, not the boy who ' d once sat at Old Nan ' s feet with Bran and Robb and Arya. Yet Lord Commander Mormont gave a snort . " If Ben Stark had come under Wildling attack a half day ' s ride from Castle Black, he would have returned for more men, chased the killers through all seven hells and brought me back their heads . " " Unless he was slain as well, " Ser Jaremy insisted. The words hurt, even now . It had been so long, it seemed folly to cling to the hope that Ben Stark was still alive, but Jon Snow was nothing if not stubborn. " It has been close on half a year since Benjen left us, my lord, " Ser Jaremy went on . " The forest is vast . The Wildlings might have fallen on him anywhere . I ' d wager these two were the last survivors of his party, on their way back to us … but the enemy caught them before they could reach the safety of the Wall . The corpses are still fresh, these men cannot have been dead more than a day … " " NO, " Samwell Tarly squeaked. Jon was startled . Sam ' s nervous, high-pitched voice was the last he would have expected to hear . The fat boy was frightened of the officers, and Ser Jaremy was not known for his patience. " I did not ask for your views, boy, " Rykker said coldly. Jon blurted [BOS] Let him speak, ser, [EOS]  Mormont ' s eyes flicked from Sam to Jon and back again . " If the lad has something to say, I ' ll hear him out . Come closer, boy . We can ' t see you behind those horses . " Sam edged past Jon and the garrons, sweating profusely . " My lord, it … it can ' t be a day or … look … the blood … " " Yes? " Mormont growled impatiently . " Blood, what of it? " " He soils his smallclothes at the sight of it, " Chett shouted out, and the rangers laughed. Sam mopped at the sweat on his brow . You … you can see where Ghost … Jon ' s direwolf … you can see where he tore off that man ' s hand, and yet … the stump hasn ' t bled, look … He waved a hand . My father … L-lord Randyll, he, he made me watch him dress animals sometimes, when … after … Sam shook his head from side to side, his chins quivering . Now that he had looked at the bodies, he could not seem to look away . A fresh kill … the blood would still flow, my lords . Later … later it would be clotted, like a … a jelly, thick and … and … He looked as though he was going to be sick . This man … look at the wrist, it ' s all … crusty … dry … like … Jon saw at once what Sam meant . He could see the torn veins in the dead man ' s wrist, iron worms in the pale flesh . His blood was a black dust . Yet Jaremy Rykker was unconvinced [BOS] If they ' d been dead much longer than a day, they ' d be ripe by now, boy . They don ' t even smell . [EOS]  Dywen, the gnarled old forester who liked to boast that he could smell snow coming on, sidled closer to the corpses and took a whiff . " Well, they ' re no pansy flowers, but … m ' lord has the truth of it . There ' s no corpse stink . " " They … they aren ' t rotting . " Sam pointed, his fat finger shaking only a little . " Look, there ' s … there ' s no maggots or … or … worms or anything … they ' ve been lying here in the woods, but they … they haven ' t been chewed or eaten by animals … only Ghost … otherwise they ' re … they ' re … " Jon said softly [BOS] Untouched, And Ghost is different . The dogs and the horses won ' t go near them . [EOS]  The rangers exchanged glances; they could see it was true, every man of them . Mormont frowned, glancing from the corpses to the dogs . " Chett, bring the hounds closer . " Chett tried, cursing, yanking on the leashes, giving one animal a lick of his boot . Most of the dogs just whimpered and planted their feet . He tried dragging one . The bitch resisted, growling and squirming as if to escape her collar . Finally she lunged at him . Chett dropped the leash and stumbled backward . The dog leapt over him and bounded off into the trees. This … this is all wrong, Sam Tarly said earnestly . The blood … there ' s bloodstains on their clothes, and … and their flesh, dry and hard, but … there ' s none on the ground, or … anywhere . With those … those … those … Sam made himself swallow, took a deep breath . With those wounds … terrible wounds … there should be blood all over . Shouldn ' t there? Dywen sucked at his wooden teeth . " Might be they didn ' t die here . Might be someone brought ' em and left ' em for us . A warning, as like . " The old forester peered down suspiciously . " And might be I ' m a fool, but I don ' t know that Othor never had no blue eyes afore . " Ser Jaremy looked startled . " Neither did Flowers, " he blurted, turning to stare at the dead man. A silence fell over the wood . For a moment all they heard was Sam ' s heavy breathing and the wet sound of Dywen sucking on his teeth . Jon squatted beside Ghost. " Burn them, " someone whispered . One of the rangers; Jon could not have said who . " Yes, burn them, " a second voice urged. The Old Bear gave a stubborn shake of his head . " Not yet . I want Maester Aemon to have a look at them . We ' ll bring them back to the Wall . " Some commands are more easily given than obeyed . They wrapped the dead men in cloaks, but when Hake and Dywen tried to tie one onto a horse, the animal went mad, screaming and rearing, lashing out with its hooves, even biting at Ketter when he ran to help . The rangers had no better luck with the other garrons; not even the most placid wanted any part of these burdens . In the end they were forced to hack off branches and fashion crude slings to carry the corpses back on foot . It was well past midday by the time they started back. " I will have these woods searched, " Mormont commanded Ser Jaremy as they set out . " Every tree, every rock, every bush, and every foot of muddy ground within ten leagues of here . Use all the men you have, and if you do not have enough, borrow hunters and foresters from the stewards . If Ben and the others are out here, dead or alive, I will have them found . And if there is anyone else in these woods, I will know of it . You are to track them and take them, alive if possible . Is that understood? " " It is, my lord, " Ser Jaremy said . " It will be done . " After that, Mormont rode in silence, brooding . Jon followed close behind him; as the Lord Commander ' s steward, that was his place . The day was grey, damp, overcast, the sort of day that made you wish for rain . No wind stirred the wood; the air hung humid and heavy, and Jon ' s clothes clung to his skin . It was warm . Too warm . The Wall was weeping copiously, had been weeping for days, and sometimes Jon even imagined it was shrinking. The old men called this weather spirit summer, and said it meant the season was giving up its ghosts at last . After this the cold would come, they warned, and a long summer always meant a long winter . This summer had lasted ten years . Jon had been a babe in arms when it began. Ghost ran with them for a time and then vanished among the trees . Without the direwolf, Jon felt almost naked . He found himself glancing at every shadow with unease . Unbidden, he thought back on the tales that Old Nan used to tell them, when he was a boy at Winterfell . He could almost hear her voice again, and the click-click-click of her needles . In that darkness, the Others came riding, she used to say, dropping her voice lower and lower . Cold and dead they were, and they hated iron and fire and the touch of the sun, and every living creature with hot blood in its veins . Holdfasts and cities and kingdoms of men all fell before them, as they moved south on pale dead horses, leading hosts of the slain . They fed their dead servants on the flesh of human children … When he caught his first glimpse of the Wall looming above the tops of an ancient gnarled oak, Jon was vastly relieved . Mormont reined up suddenly and turned in his saddle . " Tarly, " he barked, " come here . " Jon saw the start of fright on Sam ' s face as he lumbered up on his mare; doubtless he thought he was in trouble . " You ' re fat but you ' re not stupid, boy, " the Old Bear said gruffly . " You did well back there . And you, Snow . " Sam blushed a vivid crimson and tripped over his own tongue as he tried to stammer out a courtesy . Jon had to smile. When they emerged from under the trees, Mormont spurred his tough little garron to a trot . Ghost came streaking out from the woods to meet them, licking his chops, his muzzle red from prey . High above, the men on the Wall saw the column approaching . Jon heard the deep, throaty call of the watchman ' s great horn, calling out across the miles; a single long blast that shuddered through the trees and echoed off the ice. The sound faded slowly to silence . One blast meant rangers returning, and Jon thought, I was a ranger for one day, at least . Whatever may come, they cannot take that away from me. Bowen Marsh was waiting at the first gate as they led their garrons through the icy tunnel . The Lord Steward was red-faced and agitated . " My lord, " he blurted at Mormont as he swung open the iron bars, " there ' s been a bird, you must come at once . " " What is it, man? " Mormont said gruffly. Curiously, Marsh glanced at Jon before he answered . " Maester Aemon has the letter . He ' s waiting in your solar . " " Very well . Jon, see to my horse, and tell Ser Jaremy to put the dead men in a storeroom until the maester is ready for them . " Mormont strode away grumbling. As they led their horses back to the stable, Jon was uncomfortably aware that people were watching him . Ser Alliser Thorne was drilling his boys in the yard, but he broke off to stare at Jon, a faint half smile on his lips . One-armed Donal Noye stood in the door of the armory . " The gods be with you, Snow, " he called out. Something ' s wrong, Jon thought . Something ' s very wrong. The dead men were carried to one of the storerooms along the base of the Wall, a dark cold cell chiseled from the ice and used to keep meat and grain and sometimes even beer . Jon saw that Mormont ' s horse was fed and watered and groomed before he took care of his own . Afterward he sought out his friends . Grenn and Toad were on watch, but he found Pyp in the common hall . " What ' s happened? " he asked. Pyp lowered his voice . " The king ' s dead . " Jon was stunned . Robert Baratheon had looked old and fat when he visited Winterfell, yet he ' d seemed hale enough, and there ' d been no talk of illness [BOS] How can you know? [EOS]  " One of the guards overheard Clydas reading the letter to Maester Aemon . " Pyp leaned close . " Jon, I ' m sorry . He was your father ' s friend, wasn ' t he? " Jon wondered if Joffrey would keep his father as the King ' s Hand . It did not seem likely . That might mean Lord Eddard would return to Winterfell, and his sisters as well . He might even be allowed to visit them, with Lord Mormont ' s permission . It would be good to see Arya ' s grin again and to talk with his father . I will ask him about my mother, he resolved . I am a man now, it is past time he told me . Even if she was a whore, I don ' t care, I want to know [BOS] They were as close as brothers, once . [EOS]  " I heard Hake say the dead men were your uncle ' s, " Pyp said. Jon replied [BOS] Yes, Two of the six he took with him . They ' d been dead a long time, only … the bodies are queer . [EOS]  " Queer? " Pyp was all curiosity . " How queer? " " Sam will tell you . " Jon did not want to talk of it . " I should see if the Old Bear has need of me . " He walked to the Lord Commander ' s Tower alone, with a curious sense of apprehension . The brothers on guard eyed him solemnly as he approached . " The Old Bear ' s in his solar, " one of them announced . " He was asking for you . " Jon nodded . He should have come straight from the stable . He climbed the tower steps briskly . He wants wine or a fire in his hearth, that ' s all, he told himself. When he entered the solar, Mormont ' s raven screamed at him . " Corn! " the bird shrieked . " Corn! Corn! Corn! " " Don ' t you believe it, I just fed him, " the Old Bear growled . He was seated by the window, reading a letter . " Bring me a cup of wine, and pour one for yourself . " " For myself, my lord? " Mormont lifted his eyes from the letter to stare at Jon . There was pity in that look; he could taste it . " You heard me . " Jon poured with exaggerated care, vaguely aware that he was drawing out the act . When the cups were filled, he would have no choice but to face whatever was in that letter . Yet all too soon, they were filled . " Sit, boy, " Mormont commanded him . " Drink . " Jon remained standing [BOS] It ' s my father, isn ' t it? [EOS]  The Old Bear tapped the letter with a finger . Your father and the king, he rumbled . I won ' t lie to you, it ' s grievous news . I never thought to see another king, not at my age, with Robert half my years and strong as a bull . He took a gulp of wine . They say the king loved to hunt . The things we love destroy us every time, lad . Remember that . My son loved that young wife of his . Vain woman . If not for her, he would never have thought to sell those poachers. Jon could scarcely follow what he was saying [BOS] My lord, I don ' t understand . What ' s happened to my father? [EOS]  I told you to sit, Mormont grumbled . Sit, the raven screamed . And have a drink, damn you . That ' s a command, Snow. Jon sat, and took a sip of wine. " Lord Eddard has been imprisoned . He is charged with treason . It is said he plotted with Robert ' s brothers to deny the throne to Prince Joffrey . " Jon said at once [BOS] No, That couldn ' t be . My father would never betray the king! [EOS]  " Be that as it may, " said Mormont . " It is not for me to say . Nor for you . " Jon insisted . How could they think his father was a traitor, had they all gone mad? Lord Eddard Stark would never dishonor himself … would he? [BOS] But it ' s a lie, [EOS]  He fathered a bastard, a small voice whispered inside him . Where was the honor in that? And your mother, what of her? He will not even speak her name. " My lord, what will happen to him? Will they kill him? " " As to that, I cannot say, lad . I mean to send a letter . I knew some of the king ' s councillors in my youth . Old Pycelle, Lord Stannis, Ser Barristan … Whatever your father has done, or hasn ' t done, he is a great lord . He must be allowed to take the black and join us here . Gods knows, we need men of Lord Eddard ' s ability . " Jon knew that other men accused of treason had been allowed to redeem their honor on the Wall in days past . Why not Lord Eddard? His father here . That was a strange thought, and strangely uncomfortable . It would be a monstrous injustice to strip him of Winterfell and force him to take the black, and yet if it meant his life … And would Joffrey allow it? He remembered the prince at Winterfell, the way he ' d mocked Robb and Ser Rodrik in the yard . Jon himself he had scarcely even noticed; bastards were beneath even his contempt . " My lord, will the king listen to you? " The Old Bear shrugged . " A boy king … I imagine he ' ll listen to his mother . A pity the dwarf isn ' t with them . He ' s the lad ' s uncle, and he saw our need when he visited us . It was a bad thing, your lady mother taking him captive— " Jon reminded him sharply . Tyrion Lannister had been a friend to him . If Lord Eddard was killed, she would be as much to blame as the queen [BOS] Lady Stark is not my mother, My lord, what of my sisters? Arya and Sansa, they were with my father, do you know— [EOS]  Pycelle makes no mention of them, but doubtless they ' ll be treated gently . I will ask about them when I write . Mormont shook his head . This could not have happened at a worse time . If ever the realm needed a strong king … there are dark days and cold nights ahead, I feel it in my bones … He gave Jon a long shrewd look . I hope you are not thinking of doing anything stupid, boy. He ' s my father, Jon wanted to say, but he knew that Mormont would not want to hear it . His throat was dry . He made himself take another sip of wine. Your duty is here now, the Lord Commander reminded him . Your old life ended when you took the black . His bird made a raucous echo . Black . Mormont took no notice . Whatever they do in King ' s Landing is none of our concern . When Jon did not answer, the old man finished his wine and said, You ' re free to go . I ' ll have no further need of you today . On the morrow you can help me write that letter. Jon did not remember standing or leaving the solar . The next he knew, he was descending the tower steps, thinking, This is my father, my sisters, how can it be none of my concern. Outside, one of the guards looked at him and said, " Be strong, boy . The gods are cruel . " They know, Jon realized . " My father is no traitor, " he said hoarsely . Even the words stuck in his throat, as if to choke him . The wind was rising, and it seemed colder in the yard than it had when he ' d gone in . Spirit summer was drawing to an end. The rest of the afternoon passed as if in a dream . Jon could not have said where he walked, what he did, who he spoke with . Ghost was with him, he knew that much . The silent presence of the direwolf gave him comfort . The girls do not even have that much, he thought . Their wolves might have kept them safe, but Lady is dead and Nymeria ' s lost, they ' re all alone. A north wind had begun to blow by the time the sun went down . Jon could hear it skirling against the Wall and over the icy battlements as he went to the common hall for the evening meal . Hobb had cooked up a venison stew, thick with barley, onions, and carrots . When he spooned an extra portion onto Jon ' s plate and gave him the crusty heel of the bread, he knew what it meant . He knows . He looked around the hall, saw heads turn quickly, eyes politely averted . They all know. His friends rallied to him . We asked the septon to light a candle for your father, Matthar told him . It ' s a lie, we all know it ' s a lie, even Grenn knows it ' s a lie, Pyp chimed in . Grenn nodded, and Sam clasped Jon ' s hand, You ' re my brother now, so he ' s my father too, the fat boy said . If you want to go out to the weirwoods and pray to the old gods, I ' ll go with you. The weirwoods were beyond the Wall, yet he knew Sam meant what he said . They are my brothers, he thought . As much as Robb and Bran and Rickon … And then he heard the laughter, sharp and cruel as a whip, and the voice of Ser Alliser Thorne . " Not only a bastard, but a traitor ' s bastard, " he was telling the men around him. In the blink of an eye, Jon had vaulted onto the table, dagger in his hand . Pyp made a grab for him, but he wrenched his leg away, and then he was sprinting down the table and kicking the bowl from Ser Alliser ' s hand . Stew went flying everywhere, spattering the brothers . Thorne recoiled . People were shouting, but Jon Snow did not hear them . He lunged at Ser Alliser ' s face with the dagger, slashing at those cold onyx eyes, but Sam threw himself between them and before Jon could get around him, Pyp was on his back clinging like a monkey, and Grenn was grabbing his arm while Toad wrenched the knife from his fingers. Later, much later, after they had marched him back to his sleeping cell, Mormont came down to see him, raven on his shoulder . I told you not to do anything stupid, boy, the Old Bear said . Boy, the bird chorused . Mormont shook his head, disgusted . And to think I had high hopes for you. They took his knife and his sword and told him he was not to leave his cell until the high officers met to decide what was to be done with him . And then they placed a guard outside his door to make certain he obeyed . His friends were not allowed to see him, but the Old Bear did relent and permit him Ghost, so he was not utterly alone. " My father is no traitor, " he told the direwolf when the rest had gone . Ghost looked at him in silence . Jon slumped against the wall, hands around his knees, and stared at the candle on the table beside his narrow bed . The flame flickered and swayed, the shadows moved around him, the room seemed to grow darker and colder . I will not sleep tonight, Jon thought. Yet he must have dozed . When he woke, his legs were stiff and cramped and the candle had long since burned out . Ghost stood on his hind legs, scrabbling at the door . Jon was startled to see how tall he ' d grown . " Ghost, what is it? " he called softly . The direwolf turned his head and looked down at him, baring his fangs in a silent snarl . Has he gone mad? Jon wondered . " It ' s me, Ghost, " he murmured, trying not to sound afraid . Yet he was trembling, violently . When had it gotten so cold? Ghost backed away from the door . There were deep gouges where he ' d raked the wood . Jon watched him with mounting disquiet . " There ' s someone out there, isn ' t there? " he whispered . Crouching, the direwolf crept backward, white fur rising on the back of his neck . The guard, he thought, they left a man to guard my door, Ghost smells him through the door, that ' s all it is. Slowly, Jon pushed himself to his feet . He was shivering uncontrollably, wishing he still had a sword . Three quick steps brought him to the door . He grabbed the handle and pulled it inward . The creak of the hinges almost made him jump. His guard was sprawled bonelessly across the narrow steps, looking up at him . Looking up at him, even though he was lying on his stomach . His head had been twisted completely around. It can ' t be, Jon told himself . This is the Lord Commander ' s Tower, it ' s guarded day and night, this couldn ' t happen, it ' s a dream, I ' m having a nightmare. Ghost slid past him, out the door . The wolf started up the steps, stopped, looked back at Jon . That was when he heard it; the soft scrape of a boot on stone, the sound of a latch turning . The sounds came from above . From the Lord Commander ' s chambers. A nightmare this might be, yet it was no dream. The guard ' s sword was in its sheath . Jon knelt and worked it free . The heft of steel in his fist made him bolder . He moved up the steps, Ghost padding silently before him . Shadows lurked in every turn of the stair . Jon crept up warily, probing any suspicious darkness with the point of his sword. Suddenly he heard the shriek of Mormont ' s raven . Corn, the bird was screaming . Corn, corn, corn, corn, corn, corn . Ghost bounded ahead, and Jon came scrambling after . The door to Mormont ' s solar was wide open . The direwolf plunged through . Jon stopped in the doorway, blade in hand, giving his eyes a moment to adjust . Heavy drapes had been pulled across the windows, and the darkness was black as ink . Who ' s there? he called out. Then he saw it, a shadow in the shadows, sliding toward the inner door that led to Mormont ' s sleeping cell, a man-shape all in black, cloaked and hooded … but beneath the hood, its eyes shone with an icy blue radiance … Ghost leapt . Man and wolf went down together with neither scream nor snarl, rolling, smashing into a chair, knocking over a table laden with papers . Mormont ' s raven was flapping overhead, screaming, Jon felt as blind as Maester Aemon . Keeping the wall to his back, he slid toward the window and ripped down the curtain . Moonlight flooded the solar . He glimpsed black hands buried in white fur, swollen dark fingers tightening around his direwolf ' s throat . Ghost was twisting and snapping, legs flailing in the air, but he could not break free [BOS] Corn, corn, corn, corn . [EOS]  Jon had no time to be afraid . He threw himself forward, shouting, bringing down the longsword with all his weight behind it . Steel sheared through sleeve and skin and bone, yet the sound was wrong somehow . The smell that engulfed him was so queer and cold he almost gagged . He saw arm and hand on the floor, black fingers wriggling in a pool of moonlight . Ghost wrenched free of the other hand and crept away, red tongue lolling from his mouth. The hooded man lifted his pale moon face, and Jon slashed at it without hesitation . The sword laid the intruder open to the bone, taking off half his nose and opening a gash cheek to cheek under those eyes, eyes, eyes like blue stars burning . Jon knew that face . Othor, he thought, reeling back . Gods, he ' s dead, he ' s dead, I saw him dead. He felt something scrabble at his ankle . Black fingers clawed at his calf . The arm was crawling up his leg, ripping at wool and flesh . Shouting with revulsion, Jon pried the fingers off his leg with the point of his sword and flipped the thing away . It lay writhing, fingers opening and closing. The corpse lurched forward . There was no blood . One-armed, face cut near in half, it seemed to feel nothing . Jon held the longsword before him . Stay away! he commanded, his voice gone shrill . Corn, screamed the raven, corn, corn . The severed arm was wriggling out of its torn sleeve, a pale snake with a black five-fingered head . Ghost pounced and got it between his teeth . Finger bones crunched . Jon hacked at the corpse ' s neck, felt the steel bite deep and hard. Dead Othor slammed into him, knocking him off his feet. Jon ' s breath went out of him as the fallen table caught him between his shoulder blades . The sword, where was the sword? He ' d lost the damned sword! When he opened his mouth to scream, the wight jammed its black corpse fingers into Jon ' s mouth . Gagging, he tried to shove it off, but the dead man was too heavy . Its hand forced itself farther down his throat, icy cold, choking him . Its face was against his own, filling the world . Frost covered its eyes, sparkling blue . Jon raked cold flesh with his nails and kicked at the thing ' s legs . He tried to bite, tried to punch, tried to breathe … And suddenly the corpse ' s weight was gone, its fingers ripped from his throat . It was all Jon could do to roll over, retching and shaking . Ghost had it again . He watched as the direwolf buried his teeth in the wight ' s gut and began to rip and tear . He watched, only half conscious, for a long moment before he finally remembered to look for his sword … … and saw Lord Mormont, naked and groggy from sleep, standing in the doorway with an oil lamp in hand . Gnawed and fingerless, the arm thrashed on the floor, wriggling toward him. Jon tried to shout, but his voice was gone . Staggering to his feet, he kicked the arm away and snatched the lamp from the Old Bear ' s fingers . The flame flickered and almost died . " Burn! " the raven cawed . " Burn, burn, burn! " Spinning, Jon saw the drapes he ' d ripped from the window . He flung the lamp into the puddled cloth with both hands . Metal crunched, glass shattered, oil spewed, and the hangings went up in a great whoosh of flame . The heat of it on his face was sweeter than any kiss Jon had ever known . " Ghost! " he shouted. The direwolf wrenched free and came to him as the wight struggled to rise, dark snakes spilling from the great wound in its belly . Jon plunged his hand into the flames, grabbed a fistful of the burning drapes, and whipped them at the dead man . Let it burn, he prayed as the cloth smothered the corpse, gods, please, please, let it burn. " Are you well, Snow? " Lord Mormont asked, scowling. " Well, " his raven squawked . " Well . " Jon lied … loudly, as if that could make it true [BOS] I am, my lord, And you? [EOS]  Mormont frowned . " A dead man tried to kill me . How well could I be? " He scratched under his chin . His shaggy grey beard had been singed in the fire, and he ' d hacked it off . The pale stubble of his new whiskers made him look old, disreputable, and grumpy . " You do not look well . How is your hand? " Jon flexed his bandaged fingers to show him . He had burned himself more badly than he knew throwing the flaming drapes, and his right hand was swathed in silk halfway to the elbow . At the time he ' d felt nothing; the agony had come after . His cracked red skin oozed fluid, and fearsome blood blisters rose between his fingers, big as roaches [BOS] Healing . The maester says I ' ll have scars, but otherwise the hand should be as good as it was before . [EOS]  " A scarred hand is nothing . On the Wall, you ' ll be wearing gloves often as not . " " As you say, my lord . " It was not the thought of scars that troubled Jon; it was the rest of it . Maester Aemon had given him milk of the poppy, yet even so, the pain had been hideous . At first it had felt as if his hand were still aflame, burning day and night . Only plunging it into basins of snow and shaved ice gave any relief at all . Jon thanked the gods that no one but Ghost saw him writhing on his bed, whimpering from the pain . And when at last he did sleep, he dreamt, and that was even worse . In the dream, the corpse he fought had blue eyes, black hands, and his father ' s face, but he dared not tell Mormont that. " Dywen and Hake returned last night, " the Old Bear said . " They found no sign of your uncle, no more than the others did . " " I know . " Jon had dragged himself to the common hall to sup with his friends, and the failure of the rangers ' search had been all the men had been talking of. You know, Mormont grumbled . How is it that everyone knows everything around here? He did not seem to expect an answer . It would seem there were only the two of … of those creatures, whatever they were, I will not call them men . And thank the gods for that . Any more and … well, that doesn ' t bear thinking of . There will be more, though . I can feel it in these old bones of mine, and Maester Aemon agrees . The cold winds are rising . Summer is at an end, and a winter is coming such as this world has never seen. Winter is coming . The Stark words had never sounded so grim or ominous to Jon as they did now . " My lord, " he asked hesitantly, " it ' s said there was a bird last night … " " There was . What of it? " " I had hoped for some word of my father . " " Father, " taunted the old raven, bobbing its head as it walked across Mormont ' s shoulders . " Father . " The Lord Commander reached up to pinch its beak shut, but the raven hopped up on his head, fluttered its wings, and flew across the chamber to light above a window . Grief and noise, Mormont grumbled . That ' s all they ' re good for, ravens . Why I put up with that pestilential bird … if there was news of Lord Eddard, don ' t you think I would have sent for you? Bastard or no, you ' re still his blood . The message concerned Ser Barristan Selmy . It seems he ' s been removed from the Kingsguard . They gave his place to that black dog Clegane, and now Selmy ' s wanted for treason . The fools sent some watchmen to seize him, but he slew two of them and escaped . Mormont snorted, leaving no doubt of his view of men who ' d send gold cloaks against a knight as renowed as Barristan the Bold . We have white shadows in the woods and unquiet dead stalking our halls, and a boy sits the Iron Throne, he said in disgust. The raven laughed shrilly . " Boy, boy, boy, boy . " Ser Barristan had been the Old Bear ' s best hope, Jon remembered; if he had fallen, what chance was there that Mormont ' s letter would be heeded? He curled his hand into a fist . Pain shot through his burned fingers . " What of my sisters? " " The message made no mention of Lord Eddard or the girls . " He gave an irritated shrug . " Perhaps they never got my letter . Aemon sent two copies, with his best birds, but who can say? More like, Pycelle did not deign to reply . It would not be the first time, nor the last . I fear we count for less than nothing in King ' s Landing . They tell us what they want us to know, and that ' s little enough . " And you tell me what you want me to know, and that ' s less, Jon thought resentfully . His brother Robb had called the banners and ridden south to war, yet no word of that had been breathed to him … save by Samwell Tarly, who ' d read the letter to Maester Aemon and whispered its contents to Jon that night in secret, all the time saying how he shouldn ' t . Doubtless they thought his brother ' s war was none of his concern . It troubled him more than he could say . Robb was marching and he was not . No matter how often Jon told himself that his place was here now, with his new brothers on the Wall, he still felt craven. " Corn, " the raven was crying . " Corn, corn . " " Oh, be quiet, " the Old Bear told it . " Snow, how soon does Maester Aemon say you ' ll have use of that hand back? " Jon replied [BOS] Soon, [EOS]  " Good . " On the table between them, Lord Mormont laid a large sword in a black metal scabbard banded with silver . " Here . You ' ll be ready for this, then . " The raven flapped down and landed on the table, strutting toward the sword, head cocked curiously . Jon hesitated . He had no inkling what this meant . " My lord? " " The fire melted the silver off the pommel and burnt the crossguard and grip . Well, dry leather and old wood, what could you expect? The blade, now … you ' d need a fire a hundred times as hot to harm the blade . " Mormont shoved the scabbard across the rough oak planks . " I had the rest made anew . Take it . " " Take it, " echoed his raven, preening . " Take it, take it . " Awkwardly, Jon took the sword in hand . His left hand; his bandaged right was still too raw and clumsy . Carefully he pulled it from its scabbard and raised it level with his eyes. The pommel was a hunk of pale stone weighted with lead to balance the long blade . It had been carved into the likeness of a snarling wolf ' s head, with chips of garnet set into the eyes . The grip was virgin leather, soft and black, as yet unstained by sweat or blood . The blade itself was a good half foot longer than those Jon was used to, tapered to thrust as well as slash, with three fullers deeply incised in the metal . Where Ice was a true two-handed greatsword, this was a hand-and-a-halfer, sometimes named a " bastard sword . " Yet the wolf sword actually seemed lighter than the blades he had wielded before . When Jon turned it sideways, he could see the ripples in the dark steel where the metal had been folded back on itself again and again . " This is Valyrian steel, my lord, " he said wonderingly . His father had let him handle Ice often enough; he knew the look, the feel. " It is, " the Old Bear told him . " It was my father ' s sword, and his father ' s before him . The Mormonts have carried it for five centuries . I wielded it in my day and passed it on to my son when I took the black . " He is giving me his son ' s sword . Jon could scarcely believe it . The blade was exquisitely balanced . The edges glimmered faintly as they kissed the light . " Your son— " " My son brought dishonor to House Mormont, but at least he had the grace to leave the sword behind when he fled . My sister returned it to my keeping, but the very sight of it reminded me of Jorah ' s shame, so I put it aside and thought no more of it until we found it in the ashes of my bedchamber . The original pommel was a bear ' s head, silver, yet so worn its features were all but indistinguishable . For you, I thought a white wolf more apt . One of our builders is a fair stonecarver . " When Jon had been Bran ' s age, he had dreamed of doing great deeds, as boys always did . The details of his feats changed with every dreaming, but quite often he imagined saving his father ' s life . Afterward Lord Eddard would declare that Jon had proved himself a true Stark, and place Ice in his hand . Even then he had known it was only a child ' s folly; no bastard could ever hope to wield a father ' s sword . Even the memory shamed him . What kind of man stole his own brother ' s birthright? I have no right to this, he thought, no more than to Ice . He twitched his burned fingers, feeling a throb of pain deep under the skin . " My lord, you honor me, but— " " Spare me your but ' s, boy, " Lord Mormont interrupted . " I would not be sitting here were it not for you and that beast of yours . You fought bravely … and more to the point, you thought quickly . Fire! Yes, damn it . We ought to have known . We ought to have remembered . The Long Night has come before . Oh, eight thousand years is a good while, to be sure … yet if the Night ' s Watch does not remember, who will? " " Who will, " chimed the talkative raven . " Who will . " Truly, the gods had heard Jon ' s prayer that night; the fire had caught in the dead man ' s clothing and consumed him as if his flesh were candle wax and his bones old dry wood . Jon had only to close his eyes to see the thing staggering across the solar, crashing against the furniture and flailing at the flames . It was the face that haunted him most; surrounded by a nimbus of fire, hair blazing like straw, the dead flesh melting away and sloughing off its skull to reveal the gleam of bone beneath. Whatever demonic force moved Othor had been driven out by the flames; the twisted thing they had found in the ashes had been no more than cooked meat and charred bone . Yet in his nightmare he faced it again … and this time the burning corpse wore Lord Eddard ' s features . It was his father ' s skin that burst and blackened, his father ' s eyes that ran liquid down his cheeks like jellied tears . Jon did not understand why that should be or what it might mean, but it frightened him more than he could say. " A sword ' s small payment for a life, " Mormont concluded . " Take it, I ' ll hear no more of it, is that understood? " " Yes, my lord . " The soft leather gave beneath Jon ' s fingers, as if the sword were molding itself to his grip already . He knew he should be honored, and he was, and yet … He is not my father . The thought leapt unbidden to Jon ' s mind . Lord Eddard Stark is my father . I will not forget him, no matter how many swords they give me . Yet he could scarcely tell Lord Mormont that it was another man ' s sword he dreamt of … " I want no courtesies either, " Mormont said, " so thank me no thanks . Honor the steel with deeds, not words . " Jon nodded [BOS] Does it have a name, my lord? [EOS]  " It did, once . Longclaw, it was called . " " Claw, " the raven cried . " Claw . " Jon tried a practice cut . He was clumsy and uncomfortable with his left hand, yet even so the steel seemed to flow through the air, as if it had a will of its own [BOS] Longclaw is an apt name . Wolves have claws, as much as bears . [EOS]  The Old Bear seemed pleased by that . " I suppose they do . You ' ll want to wear that over the shoulder, I imagine . It ' s too long for the hip, at least until you ' ve put on a few inches . And you ' ll need to work at your two-handed strikes as well . Ser Endrew can show you some moves, when your burns have healed . " " Ser Endrew? " Jon did not know the name. " Ser Endrew Tarth, a good man . He ' s on his way from the Shadow Tower to assume the duties of master-at-arms . Ser Alliser Thorne left yestermorn for Eastwatch-by-the-Sea . " Jon lowered the sword [BOS] Why? [EOS] he said, stupidly. Mormont snorted . " Because I sent him, why do you think? He ' s bringing the hand your Ghost tore off the end of Jafer Flowers ' s wrist . I have commanded him to take ship to King ' s Landing and lay it before this boy king . That should get young Joffrey ' s attention, I ' d think … and Ser Alliser ' s a knight, highborn, anointed, with old friends at court, altogether harder to ignore than a glorified crow . " " Crow . " Jon thought the raven sounded faintly indignant. As well, the Lord Commander continued, ignoring the bird ' s protest, it puts a thousand leagues twixt him and you without it seeming a rebuke . He jabbed a finger up at Jon ' s face . And don ' t think this means I approve of that nonsense in the common hall . Valor makes up for a fair amount of folly, but you ' re not a boy anymore, however many years you ' ve seen . That ' s a man ' s sword you have there, and it will take a man to wield her . I ' ll expect you to act the part, henceforth. " Yes, my lord . " Jon slid the sword back into the silver-banded scabbard . If not the blade he would have chosen, it was nonetheless a noble gift, and freeing him from Alliser Thorne ' s malignance was nobler still. The Old Bear scratched at his chin . " I had forgotten how much a new beard itches, " he said . " Well, no help for that . Is that hand of yours healed enough to resume your duties? " " Yes, my lord . " " Good . The night will be cold, I ' ll want hot spice wine . Find me a flagon of red, not too sour, and don ' t skimp on the spices . And tell Hobb that if he sends me boiled mutton again I ' m like to boil him . That last haunch was grey . Even the bird wouldn ' t touch it . " He stroked the raven ' s head with his thumb, and the bird made a contented quorking sound . " Away with you . I ' ve work to do . " The guards smiled at him from their niches as he wound his way down the turret stair, carrying the sword in his good hand . " Sweet steel, " one man said . " You earned that, Snow, " another told him . Jon made himself smile back at them, but his heart was not in it . He knew he should be pleased, yet he did not feel it . His hand ached, and the taste of anger was in his mouth, though he could not have said who he was angry with or why. A half dozen of his friends were lurking outside when he left the King ' s Tower, where Lord Commander Mormont now made his residence . They ' d hung a target on the granary doors, so they could seem to be honing their skills as archers, but he knew lurkers when he saw them . No sooner did he emerge than Pyp called out, " Well, come about, let ' s have a look . " Jon said [BOS] At what? [EOS]  Toad sidled close . " Your rosy butt cheeks, what else? " " The sword, " Grenn stated . " We want to see the sword . " Jon raked them with an accusing look [BOS] You knew . [EOS]  Pyp grinned . " We ' re not all as dumb as Grenn . " " You are so, " insisted Grenn . " You ' re dumber . " Halder gave an apologetic shrug . " I helped Pate carve the stone for the pommel, " the builder said, " and your friend Sam bought the garnets in Mole ' s Town . " " We knew even before that, though, " Grenn said . " Rudge has been helping Donal Noye in the forge . He was there when the Old Bear brought him the burnt blade . " " The sword! " Matt insisted . The others took up the chant . " The sword, the sword, the sword . " Jon unsheathed Longclaw and showed it to them, turning it this way and that so they could admire it . The bastard blade glittered in the pale sunlight, dark and deadly [BOS] Valyrian steel, [EOS] he declared solemnly, trying to sound as pleased and proud as he ought to have felt. " I heard of a man who had a razor made of Valyrian steel, " declared Toad . " He cut his head off trying to shave . " Pyp grinned . " The Night ' s Watch is thousands of years old, " he said, " but I ' ll wager Lord Snow ' s the first brother ever honored for burning down the Lord Commander ' s Tower . " The others laughed, and even Jon had to smile . The fire he ' d started had not, in truth, burned down that formidable stone tower, but it had done a fair job of gutting the interior of the top two floors, where the Old Bear had his chambers . No one seemed to mind that very much, since it had also destroyed Othor ' s murderous corpse. The other wight, the one-handed thing that had once been a ranger named Jafer Flowers, had also been destroyed, cut near to pieces by a dozen swords … but not before it had slain Ser Jaremy Rykker and four other men . Ser Jaremy had finished the job of hacking its head off, yet had died all the same when the headless corpse pulled his own dagger from its sheath and buried it in his bowels . Strength and courage did not avail much against foemen who would not fall because they were already dead; even arms and armor offered small protection. That grim thought soured Jon ' s fragile mood . " I need to see Hobb about the Old Bear ' s supper, " he announced brusquely, sliding Longclaw back into its scabbard . His friends meant well, but they did not understand . It was not their fault, truly; they had not had to face Othor, they had not seen the pale glow of those dead blue eyes, had not felt the cold of those dead black fingers . Nor did they know of the fighting in the riverlands . How could they hope to comprehend? He turned away from them abruptly and strode off, sullen . Pyp called after him, but Jon paid him no mind. They had moved him back to his old cell in tumbledown Hardin ' s Tower after the fire, and it was there he returned . Ghost was curled up asleep beside the door, but he lifted his head at the sound of Jon ' s boots . The direwolf ' s red eyes were darker than garnets and wiser than men . Jon knelt, scratched his ear, and showed him the pommel of the sword . " Look . It ' s you . " Ghost sniffed at his carved stone likeness and tried a lick . Jon smiled . " You ' re the one deserves an honor, " he told the wolf … and suddenly he found himself remembering how he ' d found him, that day in the late summer snow . They had been riding off with the other pups, but Jon had heard a noise and turned back, and there he was, white fur almost invisible against the drifts . He was all alone, he thought, apart from the others in the litter . He was different, so they drove him out. " Jon? " He looked up . Samwell Tarly stood rocking nervously on his heels . His cheeks were red, and he was wrapped in a heavy fur cloak that made him look ready for hibernation. " Sam . " Jon stood . " What is it? Do you want to see the sword? " If the others had known, no doubt Sam did too. The fat boy shook his head . I was heir to my father ' s blade once, he said mournfully . Heartsbane . Lord Randyll let me hold it a few times, but it always scared me . It was Valyrian steel, beautiful but so sharp I was afraid I ' d hurt one of my sisters . Dickon will have it now . He wiped sweaty hands on his cloak . I … ah … Maester Aemon wants to see you. It was not time for his bandages to be changed . Jon frowned suspiciously . Why? he demanded . Sam looked miserable . That was answer enough . You told him, didn ' t you? Jon said angrily . You told him that you told me. " I … he … Jon, I didn ' t want to … he asked … I mean … I think he knew, he sees things no one else sees … " Jon pointed out forcefully, disgusted [BOS] He ' s blind, I can find the way myself . [EOS] He left Sam standing there, openmouthed and quivering. He found Maester Aemon up in the rookery, feeding the ravens . Clydas was with him, carrying a bucket of chopped meat as they shuffled from cage to cage . " Sam said you wanted me? " The maester nodded . I did indeed . Clydas, give Jon the bucket . Perhaps he will be kind enough to assist me . The hunched, pink-eyed brother handed Jon the bucket and scurried down the ladder . Toss the meat into the cages, Aemon instructed him . The birds will do the rest. Jon shifted the bucket to his right hand and thrust his left down into the bloody bits . The ravens began to scream noisily and fly at the bars, beating at the metal with night-black wings . The meat had been chopped into pieces no larger than a finger joint . He filled his fist and tossed the raw red morsels into the cage, and the squawking and squabbling grew hotter . Feathers flew as two of the larger birds fought over a choice piece . Quickly Jon grabbed a second handful and threw it in after the first [BOS] Lord Mormont ' s raven likes fruit and corn . [EOS]  " He is a rare bird, " the maester said . " Most ravens will eat grain, but they prefer flesh . It makes them strong, and I fear they relish the taste of blood . In that they are like men … and like men, not all ravens are alike . " Jon had nothing to say to that . He threw meat, wondering why he ' d been summoned . No doubt the old man would tell him, in his own good time . Maester Aemon was not a man to be hurried. Doves and pigeons can also be trained to carry messages, the maester went on, though the raven is a stronger flyer, larger, bolder, far more clever, better able to defend itself against hawks … yet ravens are black, and they eat the dead, so some godly men abhor them . Baelor the Blessed tried to replace all the ravens with doves, did you know? The maester turned his white eyes on Jon, smiling . The Night ' s Watch prefers ravens. Jon ' s fingers were in the bucket, blood up to the wrist [BOS] Dywen says the wildlings call us crows, [EOS] he said uncertainly. " The crow is the raven ' s poor cousin . They are both beggars in black, hated and misunderstood . " Jon wished he understood what they were talking about, and why . What did he care about ravens and doves? If the old man had something to say to him, why couldn ' t he just say it? " Jon, did you ever wonder why the men of the Night ' s Watch take no wives and father no children? " Maester Aemon asked. Jon shrugged [BOS] No . [EOS] He scattered more meat . The fingers of his left hand were slimy with blood, and his right throbbed from the weight of the bucket. " So they will not love, " the old man answered, " for love is the bane of honor, the death of duty . " That did not sound right to Jon, yet he said nothing . The maester was a hundred years old, and a high officer of the Night ' s Watch; it was not his place to contradict him. The old man seemed to sense his doubts . " Tell me, Jon, if the day should ever come when your lord father must needs choose between honor on the one hand and those he loves on the other, what would he do? " Jon hesitated . He wanted to say that Lord Eddard would never dishonor himself, not even for love, yet inside a small sly voice whispered, He fathered a bastard, where was the honor in that? And your mother, what of his duty to her, he will not even say her name . " He would do whatever was right, " he said … ringingly, to make up for his hesitation . " No matter what . " Then Lord Eddard is a man in ten thousand . Most of us are not so strong . What is honor compared to a woman ' s love? What is duty against the feel of a newborn son in your arms … or the memory of a brother ' s smile? Wind and words . Wind and words . We are only human, and the gods have fashioned us for love . That is our great glory, and our great tragedy. The men who formed the Night ' s Watch knew that only their courage shielded the realm from the darkness to the north . They knew they must have no divided loyalties to weaken their resolve . So they vowed they would have no wives nor children. Yet brothers they had, and sisters . Mothers who gave them birth, fathers who gave them names . They came from a hundred quarrelsome kingdoms, and they knew times may change, but men do not . So they pledged as well that the Night ' s Watch would take no part in the battles of the realms it guarded. They kept their pledge . When Aegon slew Black Harren and claimed his kingdom, Harren ' s brother was Lord Commander on the Wall, with ten thousand swords to hand . He did not march . In the days when the Seven Kingdoms were seven kingdoms, not a generation passed that three or four of them were not at war . The Watch took no part . When the Andals crossed the narrow sea and swept away the kingdoms of the First Men, the sons of the fallen kings held true to their vows and remained at their posts . So it has always been, for years beyond counting . Such is the price of honor. " A craven can be as brave as any man, when there is nothing to fear . And we all do our duty, when there is no cost to it . How easy it seems then, to walk the path of honor . Yet soon or late in every man ' s life comes a day when it is not easy, a day when he must choose . " Some of the ravens were still eating, long stringy bits of meat dangling from their beaks . The rest seemed to be watching him . Jon could feel the weight of all those tiny black eyes . " And this is my day … is that what you ' re saying? " Maester Aemon turned his head and looked at him with those dead white eyes . It was as if he were seeing right into his heart . Jon felt naked and exposed . He took the bucket in both hands and flung the rest of the slops through the bars . Strings of meat and blood flew everywhere, scattering the ravens . They took to the air, shrieking wildly . The quicker birds snatched morsels on the wing and gulped them down greedily . Jon let the empty bucket clang to the floor. The old man laid a withered, spotted hand on his shoulder . " It hurts, boy, " he said softly . " Oh, yes . Choosing … it has always hurt . And always will . I know . " Jon said bitterly [BOS] You don ' t know, No one knows . Even if I am his bastard, he ' s still my father … [EOS]  Maester Aemon sighed . " Have you heard nothing I ' ve told you, Jon? Do you think you are the first? " He shook his ancient head, a gesture weary beyond words . " Three times the gods saw fit to test my vows . Once when I was a boy, once in the fullness of my manhood, and once when I had grown old . By then my strength was fled, my eyes grown dim, yet that last choice was as cruel as the first . My ravens would bring the news from the south, words darker than their wings, the ruin of my House, the death of my kin, disgrace and desolation . What could I have done, old, blind, frail? I was helpless as a suckling babe, yet still it grieved me to sit forgotten as they cut down my brother ' s poor grandson, and his son, and even the little children … " Jon was shocked to see the shine of tears in the old man ' s eyes [BOS] Who are you? [EOS] he asked quietly, almost in dread. A toothless smile quivered on the ancient lips . " Only a maester of the Citadel, bound in service to Castle Black and the Night ' s Watch . In my order, we put aside our house names when we take our vows and don the collar . " The old man touched the maester ' s chain that hung loosely around his thin, fleshless neck . " My father was Maekar, the First of his Name, and my brother Aegon reigned after him in my stead . My grandfather named me for Prince Aemon the Dragonknight, who was his uncle, or his father, depending on which tale you believe . Aemon, he called me … " " Aemon … Targaryen? " Jon could scarcely believe it. Once, the old man said . Once . So you see, Jon, I do know … and knowing, I will not tell you stay or go . You must make that choice yourself, and live with it all the rest of your days . As I have . His voice fell to a whisper . As I have … The mare whickered softly as Jon Snow tightened the cinch . Easy, sweet lady, he said in a soft voice, quieting her with a touch . Wind whispered through the stable, a cold dead breath on his face, but Jon paid it no mind . He strapped his roll to the saddle, his scarred fingers stiff and clumsy . Ghost, he called softly, to me . And the wolf was there, eyes like embers. " Jon, please . You must not do this . " He mounted, the reins in his hand, and wheeled the horse around to face the night . Samwell Tarly stood in the stable door, a full moon peering over his shoulder . He threw a giant ' s shadow, immense and black . " Get out of my way, Sam . " " Jon, you can ' t, " Sam said . " I won ' t let you . " Jon told him [BOS] I would sooner not hurt you, Move aside, Sam, or I ' ll ride you down . [EOS]  " You won ' t . You have to listen to me . Please … " Jon put his spurs to horseflesh, and the mare bolted for the door . For an instant Sam stood his ground, his face as round and pale as the moon behind him, his mouth a widening O of surprise . At the last moment, when they were almost on him, he jumped aside as Jon had known he would, stumbled, and fell . The mare leapt over him, out into the night. Jon raised the hood of his heavy cloak and gave the horse her head . Castle Black was silent and still as he rode out, with Ghost racing at his side . Men watched from the Wall behind him, he knew, but their eyes were turned north, not south . No one would see him go, no one but Sam Tarly, struggling back to his feet in the dust of the old stables . He hoped Sam hadn ' t hurt himself, falling like that . He was so heavy and so ungainly, it would be just like him to break a wrist or twist his ankle getting out of the way . Jon said aloud [BOS] I warned him, It was nothing to do with him, anyway . [EOS] He flexed his burned hand as he rode, opening and closing the scarred fingers . They still pained him, but it felt good to have the wrappings off. Moonlight silvered the hills as he followed the twisting ribbon of the kingsroad . He needed to get as far from the Wall as he could before they realized he was gone . On the morrow he would leave the road and strike out overland through field and bush and stream to throw off pursuit, but for the moment speed was more important than deception . It was not as though they would not guess where he was going. The Old Bear was accustomed to rise at first light, so Jon had until dawn to put as many leagues as he could between him and the Wall … if Sam Tarly did not betray him . The fat boy was dutiful and easily frightened, but he loved Jon like a brother . If questioned, Sam would doubtless tell them the truth, but Jon could not imagine him braving the guards in front of the King ' s Tower to wake Mormont from sleep. When Jon did not appear to fetch the Old Bear ' s breakfast from the kitchen, they ' d look in his cell and find Longclaw on the bed . It had been hard to abandon it, but Jon was not so lost to honor as to take it with him . Even Jorah Mormont had not done that, when he fled in disgrace . Doubtless Lord Mormont would find someone more worthy of the blade . Jon felt bad when he thought of the old man . He knew his desertion would be salt in the still-raw wound of his son ' s disgrace . That seemed a poor way to repay him for his trust, but it couldn ' t be helped . No matter what he did, Jon felt as though he were betraying someone. Even now, he did not know if he was doing the honorable thing . The southron had it easier . They had their septons to talk to, someone to tell them the gods ' will and help sort out right from wrong . But the Starks worshiped the old gods, the nameless gods, and if the heart trees heard, they did not speak. When the last lights of Castle Black vanished behind him, Jon slowed his mare to a walk . He had a long journey ahead and only the one horse to see him through . There were holdfasts and farming villages along the road south where he might be able to trade the mare for a fresh mount when he needed one, but not if she were injured or blown. He would need to find new clothes soon; most like, he ' d need to steal them . He was clad in black from head to heel; high leather riding boots, roughspun breeches and tunic, sleeveless leather jerkin, and heavy wool cloak . His longsword and dagger were sheathed in black moleskin, and the hauberk and coif in his saddlebag were black ringmail . Any bit of it could mean his death if he were taken . A stranger wearing black was viewed with cold suspicion in every village and holdfast north of the Neck, and men would soon be watching for him . Once Maester Aemon ' s ravens took flight, Jon knew he would find no safe haven . Not even at Winterfell . Bran might want to let him in, but Maester Luwin had better sense . He would bar the gates and send Jon away, as he should . Better not to call there at all. Yet he saw the castle clear in his mind ' s eye, as if he had left it only yesterday; the towering granite walls, the Great Hall with its smells of smoke and dog and roasting meat, his father ' s solar, the turret room where he had slept . Part of him wanted nothing so much as to hear Bran laugh again, to sup on one of Gage ' s beef-and-bacon pies, to listen to Old Nan tell her tales of the children of the forest and Florian the Fool. But he had not left the Wall for that; he had left because he was after all his father ' s son, and Robb ' s brother . The gift of a sword, even a sword as fine as Longclaw, did not make him a Mormont . Nor was he Aemon Targaryen . Three times the old man had chosen, and three times he had chosen honor, but that was him . Even now, Jon could not decide whether the maester had stayed because he was weak and craven, or because he was strong and true . Yet he understood what the old man had meant, about the pain of choosing; he understood that all too well. Tyrion Lannister had claimed that most men would rather deny a hard truth than face it, but Jon was done with denials . He was who he was; Jon Snow, bastard and oathbreaker, motherless, friendless, and damned . For the rest of his life—however long that might be—he would be condemned to be an outsider, the silent man standing in the shadows who dares not speak his true name . Wherever he might go throughout the Seven Kingdoms, he would need to live a lie, lest every man ' s hand be raised against him . But it made no matter, so long as he lived long enough to take his place by his brother ' s side and help avenge his father. He remembered Robb as he had last seen him, standing in the yard with snow melting in his auburn hair . Jon would have to come to him in secret, disguised . He tried to imagine the look on Robb ' s face when he revealed himself . His brother would shake his head and smile, and he ' d say … he ' d say … He could not see the smile . Hard as he tried, he could not see it . He found himself thinking of the deserter his father had beheaded the day they ' d found the direwolves . " You said the words, " Lord Eddard had told him . " You took a vow, before your brothers, before the old gods and the new . " Desmond and Fat Tom had dragged the man to the stump . Bran ' s eyes had been wide as saucers, and Jon had to remind him to keep his pony in hand . He remembered the look on Father ' s face when Theon Greyjoy brought forth Ice, the spray of blood on the snow, the way Theon had kicked the head when it came rolling at his feet. He wondered what Lord Eddard might have done if the deserter had been his brother Benjen instead of that ragged stranger . Would it have been any different? It must, surely, surely … and Robb would welcome him, for a certainty . He had to, or else … It did not bear thinking about . Pain throbbed, deep in his fingers, as he clutched the reins . Jon put his heels into his horse and broke into a gallop, racing down the kingsroad, as if to outrun his doubts . Jon was not afraid of death, but he did not want to die like that, trussed and bound and beheaded like a common brigand . If he must perish, let it be with a sword in his hand, fighting his father ' s killers . He was no true Stark, had never been one … but he could die like one . Let them say that Eddard Stark had fathered four sons, not three. Ghost kept pace with them for almost half a mile, red tongue lolling from his mouth . Man and horse alike lowered their heads as he asked the mare for more speed . The wolf slowed, stopped, watching, his eyes glowing red in the moonlight . He vanished behind, but Jon knew he would follow, at his own pace. Scattered lights flickered through the trees ahead of him, on both sides of the road: Mole ' s Town . A dog barked as he rode through, and he heard a mule ' s raucous haw from the stable, but otherwise the village was still . Here and there the glow of hearth fires shone through shuttered windows, leaking between wooden slats, but only a few. Mole ' s Town was bigger than it seemed, but three quarters of it was under the ground, in deep warm cellars connected by a maze of tunnels . Even the whorehouse was down there, nothing on the surface but a wooden shack no bigger than a privy, with a red lantern hung over the door . On the Wall, he ' d heard men call the whores " buried treasures . " He wondered whether any of his brothers in black were down there tonight, mining . That was oathbreaking too, yet no one seemed to care. Not until he was well beyond the village did Jon slow again . By then both he and the mare were damp with sweat . He dismounted, shivering, his burned hand aching . A bank of melting snow lay under the trees, bright in the moonlight, water trickling off to form small shallow pools . Jon squatted and brought his hands together, cupping the runoff between his fingers . The snowmelt was icy cold . He drank, and splashed some on his face, until his cheeks tingled . His fingers were throbbing worse than they had in days, and his head was pounding too . I am doing the right thing, he told himself, so why do I feel so bad? The horse was well lathered, so Jon took the lead and walked her for a while . The road was scarcely wide enough for two riders to pass abreast, its surface cut by tiny streams and littered with stone . That run had been truly stupid, an invitation to a broken neck . Jon wondered what had gotten into him . Was he in such a great rush to die? Off in the trees, the distant scream of some frightened animal made him look up . His mare whinnied nervously . Had his wolf found some prey? He cupped his hands around his mouth . " Ghost! " he shouted . " Ghost, to me . " The only answer was a rush of wings behind him as an owl took flight. Frowning, Jon continued on his way . He led the mare for half an hour, until she was dry . Ghost did not appear . Jon wanted to mount up and ride again, but he was concerned about his missing wolf . " Ghost, " he called again . " Where are you? To me! Ghost! " Nothing in these woods could trouble a direwolf, even a half-grown direwolf, unless … no, Ghost was too smart to attack a bear, and if there was a wolf pack anywhere close Jon would have surely heard them howling. He should eat, he decided . Food would settle his stomach and give Ghost the chance to catch up . There was no danger yet; Castle Black still slept . In his saddlebag, he found a biscuit, a piece of cheese, and a small withered brown apple . He ' d brought salt beef as well, and a rasher of bacon he ' d filched from the kitchens, but he would save the meat for the morrow . After it was gone he ' d need to hunt, and that would slow him. Jon sat under the trees and ate his biscuit and cheese while his mare grazed along the kingsroad . He kept the apple for last . It had gone a little soft, but the flesh was still tart and juicy . He was down to the core when he heard the sounds: horses, and from the north . Quickly Jon leapt up and strode to his mare . Could he outrun them? No, they were too close, they ' d hear him for a certainty, and if they were from Castle Black … He led the mare off the road, behind a thick stand of grey-green sentinels . " Quiet now, " he said in a hushed voice, crouching down to peer through the branches . If the gods were kind, the riders would pass by . Likely as not, they were only smallfolk from Mole ' s Town, farmers on their way to their fields, although what they were doing out in the middle of the night … He listened to the sound of hooves growing steadily louder as they trotted briskly down the kingsroad . From the sound, there were five or six of them at the least . Their voices drifted through the trees. " … certain he came this way? " " We can ' t be certain . " " He could have ridden east, for all you know . Or left the road to cut through the woods . That ' s what I ' d do . " " In the dark? Stupid . If you didn ' t fall off your horse and break your neck, you ' d get lost and wind up back at the Wall when the sun came up . " " I would not . " Grenn sounded peeved . " I ' d just ride south, you can tell south by the stars . " " What if the sky was cloudy? " Pyp asked. " Then I wouldn ' t go . " Another voice broke in . " You know where I ' d be if it was me? I ' d be in Mole ' s Town, digging for buried treasure . " Toad ' s shrill laughter boomed through the trees . Jon ' s mare snorted. " Keep quiet, all of you, " Halder said . " I thought I heard something . " " Where? I didn ' t hear anything . " The horses stopped. " You can ' t hear yourself fart . " " I can too, " Grenn insisted. They all fell silent, listening . Jon found himself holding his breath . Sam, he thought . He hadn ' t gone to the Old Bear, but he hadn ' t gone to bed either, he ' d woken the other boys . Damn them all . Come dawn, if they were not in their beds, they ' d be named deserters too . What did they think they were doing? The hushed silence seemed to stretch on and on . From where Jon crouched, he could see the legs of their horses through the branches . Finally Pyp spoke up . " What did you hear? " " I don ' t know, " Halder admitted . " A sound, I thought it might have been a horse but … " " There ' s nothing here . " Out of the corner of his eye, Jon glimpsed a pale shape moving through the trees . Leaves rustled, and Ghost came bounding out of the shadows, so suddenly that Jon ' s mare started and gave a whinny . " There! " Halder shouted. " I heard it too! " Jon told the direwolf as he swung up into the saddle . He turned the mare ' s head to slide off through the trees, but they were on him before he had gone ten feet [BOS] Traitor, [EOS]  " Jon! " Pyp shouted after him. " Pull up, " Grenn said . " You can ' t outrun us all . " Jon wheeled around to face them, drawing his sword [BOS] Get back . I don ' t wish to hurt you, but I will if I have to . [EOS]  " One against seven? " Halder gave a signal . The boys spread out, surrounding him. Jon demanded [BOS] What do you want with me? [EOS]  " We want to take you back where you belong, " Pyp said. " I belong with my brother . " " We ' re your brothers now, " Grenn said. " They ' ll cut off your head if they catch you, you know, " Toad put in with a nervous laugh . " This is so stupid, it ' s like something the Aurochs would do . " " I would not, " Grenn said . " I ' m no oathbreaker . I said the words and I meant them . " Jon told them [BOS] So did I, Don ' t you understand? They murdered my father . It ' s war, my brother Robb is fighting in the riverlands— [EOS]  " We know, " said Pyp solemnly . " Sam told us everything . " " We ' re sorry about your father, " Grenn said, " but it doesn ' t matter . Once you say the words, you can ' t leave, no matter what . " Jon said fervently [BOS] I have to, [EOS]  " You said the words, " Pyp reminded him . " Now my watch begins, you said it . It shall not end until my death . " " I shall live and die at my post, " Grenn added, nodding. " You don ' t have to tell me the words, I know them as well as you do . " He was angry now . Why couldn ' t they let him go in peace? They were only making it harder. " I am the sword in the darkness, " Halder intoned. " The watcher on the walls, " piped Toad. Jon cursed them all to their faces . They took no notice . Pyp spurred his horse closer, reciting, [BOS] I am the fire that burns against the cold, the light that brings the dawn, the horn that wakes the sleepers, the shield that guards the realms of men . [EOS]  Jon warned him, brandishing his sword [BOS] Stay back, I mean it, Pyp . [EOS] They weren ' t even wearing armor, he could cut them to pieces if he had to. Matthar had circled behind him . He joined the chorus . " I pledge my life and honor to the Night ' s Watch . " Jon kicked his mare, spinning her in a circle . The boys were all around him now, closing from every side. " For this night …, " Halder trotted in from the left. " … and all the nights to come, " finished Pyp . He reached over for Jon ' s reins . " So here are your choices . Kill me, or come back with me . " Jon lifted his sword … and lowered it, helpless . " Damn you, " he said . " Damn you all . " " Do we have to bind your hands, or will you give us your word you ' ll ride back peaceful? " asked Halder. " I won ' t run, if that ' s what you mean . " Ghost moved out from under the trees and Jon glared at him . " Small help you were, " he said . The deep red eyes looked at him knowingly. " We had best hurry, " Pyp said . " If we ' re not back before first light, the Old Bear will have all our heads . " Of the ride back, Jon Snow remembered little . It seemed shorter than the journey south, perhaps because his mind was elsewhere . Pyp set the pace, galloping, walking, trotting, and then breaking into another gallop . Mole ' s Town came and went, the red lantern over the brothel long extinguished . They made good time . Dawn was still an hour off when Jon glimpsed the towers of Castle Black ahead of them, dark against the pale immensity of the Wall . It did not seem like home this time. They could take him back, Jon told himself, but they could not make him stay . The war would not end on the morrow, or the day after, and his friends could not watch him day and night . He would bide his time, make them think he was content to remain here … and then, when they had grown lax, he would be off again . Next time he would avoid the kingsroad . He could follow the Wall east, perhaps all the way to the sea, a longer route but a safer one . Or even west, to the mountains, and then south over the high passes . That was the wildling ' s way, hard and perilous, but at least no one would follow him . He wouldn ' t stray within a hundred leagues of Winterfell or the kingsroad. Samwell Tarly awaited them in the old stables, slumped on the ground against a bale of hay, too anxious to sleep . He rose and brushed himself off . " I … I ' m glad they found you, Jon . " Jon said, dismounting [BOS] I ' m not, [EOS]  Pyp hopped off his horse and looked at the lightening sky with disgust . " Give us a hand bedding down the horses, Sam, " the small boy said . " We have a long day before us, and no sleep to face it on, thanks to Lord Snow . " When day broke, Jon walked to the kitchens as he did every dawn . Three-Finger Hobb said nothing as he gave him the Old Bear ' s breakfast . Today it was three brown eggs boiled hard, with fried bread and ham steak and a bowl of wrinkled plums . Jon carried the food back to the King ' s Tower . He found Mormont at the window seat, writing . His raven was walking back and forth across his shoulders, muttering, Corn, corn, corn . The bird shrieked when Jon entered . Put the food on the table, the Old Bear said, glancing up . I ' ll have some beer. Jon opened a shuttered window, took the flagon of beer off the outside ledge, and filled a horn . Hobb had given him a lemon, still cold from the Wall . Jon crushed it in his fist . The juice trickled through his fingers . Mormont drank lemon in his beer every day, and claimed that was why he still had his own teeth. " Doubtless you loved your father, " Mormont said when Jon brought him his horn . " The things we love destroy us every time, lad . Remember when I told you that? " Jon said sullenly . He did not care to talk of his father ' s death, not even to Mormont [BOS] I remember, [EOS]  " See that you never forget it . The hard truths are the ones to hold tight . Fetch me my plate . Is it ham again? So be it . You look weary . Was your moonlight ride so tiring? " Jon ' s throat was dry [BOS] You know? [EOS]  " Know, " the raven echoed from Mormont ' s shoulder . " Know . " The Old Bear snorted . " Do you think they chose me Lord Commander of the Night ' s Watch because I ' m dumb as a stump, Snow? Aemon told me you ' d go . I told him you ' d be back . I know my men … and my boys too . Honor set you on the kingsroad … and honor brought you back . " Jon said [BOS] My friends brought me back, [EOS]  " Did I say it was your honor? " Mormont inspected his plate. " They killed my father . Did you expect me to do nothing? " " If truth be told, we expected you to do just as you did . " Mormont tried a plum, spit out the pit . " I ordered a watch kept over you . You were seen leaving . If your brothers had not fetched you back, you would have been taken along the way, and not by friends . Unless you have a horse with wings like a raven . Do you? " Jon felt like a fool [BOS] No . [EOS]  " Pity, we could use a horse like that . " Jon stood tall . He told himself that he would die well; that much he could do, at the least [BOS] I know the penalty for desertion, my lord . I ' m not afraid to die . [EOS]  " Die! " the raven cried. " Nor live, I hope, " Mormont said, cutting his ham with a dagger and feeding a bite to the bird . " You have not deserted—yet . Here you stand . If we beheaded every boy who rode to Mole ' s Town in the night, only ghosts would guard the Wall . Yet maybe you mean to flee again on the morrow, or a fortnight from now . Is that it? Is that your hope, boy? " Jon kept silent. " I thought so . " Mormont peeled the shell off a boiled egg . " Your father is dead, lad . Do you think you can bring him back? " " No, " he answered, sullen. Good, Mormont said . We ' ve seen the dead come back, you and me, and it ' s not something I care to see again . He ate the egg in two bites and flicked a bit of shell out from between his teeth . Your brother is in the field with all the power of the north behind him . Any one of his lords bannermen commands more swords than you ' ll find in all the Night ' s Watch . Why do you imagine that they need your help? Are you such a mighty warrior, or do you carry a grumkin in your pocket to magic up your sword? Jon had no answer for him . The raven was pecking at an egg, breaking the shell . Pushing his beak through the hole, he pulled out morsels of white and yoke. The Old Bear sighed . " You are not the only one touched by this war . Like as not, my sister is marching in your brother ' s host, her and those daughters of hers, dressed in men ' s mail . Maege is a hoary old snark, stubborn, short-tempered, and willful . Truth be told, I can hardly stand to be around the wretched woman, but that does not mean my love for her is any less than the love you bear your half sisters . " Frowning, Mormont took his last egg and squeezed it in his fist until the shell crunched . " Or perhaps it does . Be that as it may, I ' d still grieve if she were slain, yet you don ' t see me running off . I said the words, just as you did . My place is here … where is yours, boy? " I have no place, Jon wanted to say, I ' m a bastard, I have no rights, no name, no mother, and now not even a father . The words would not come . " I don ' t know . " " I do, " said Lord Commander Mormont . " The cold winds are rising, Snow . Beyond the Wall, the shadows lengthen . Cotter Pyke writes of vast herds of elk, streaming south and east toward the sea, and mammoths as well . He says one of his men discovered huge, misshapen footprints not three leagues from Eastwatch . Rangers from the Shadow Tower have found whole villages abandoned, and at night Ser Denys says they see fires in the mountains, huge blazes that burn from dusk till dawn . Quorin Halfhand took a captive in the depths of the Gorge, and the man swears that Mance Rayder is massing all his people in some new, secret stronghold he ' s found, to what end the gods only know . Do you think your uncle Benjen was the only ranger we ' ve lost this past year? " " Ben Jen, " the raven squawked, bobbing its head, bits of egg dribbling from its beak . " Ben Jen . Ben Jen . " Jon said . There had been others . Too many [BOS] No, [EOS]  " Do you think your brother ' s war is more important than ours? " the old man barked. Jon chewed his lip . The raven flapped its wings at him [BOS] War, war, war, war, [EOS] it sang. " It ' s not, " Mormont told him . " Gods save us, boy, you ' re not blind and you ' re not stupid . When dead men come hunting in the night, do you think it matters who sits the Iron Throne? " " No . " Jon had not thought of it that way. " Your lord father sent you to us, Jon . Why, who can say? " " Why? Why? Why? " the raven called. " All I know is that the blood of the First Men flows in the veins of the Starks . The First Men built the Wall, and it ' s said they remember things otherwise forgotten . And that beast of yours … he led us to the wights, warned you of the dead man on the steps . Ser Jaremy would doubtless call that happenstance, yet Ser Jaremy is dead and I ' m not . " Lord Mormont stabbed a chunk of ham with the point of his dagger . " I think you were meant to be here, and I want you and that wolf of yours with us when we go beyond the Wall . " His words sent a chill of excitement down Jon ' s back . " Beyond the Wall? " You heard me . I mean to find Ben Stark, alive or dead . He chewed and swallowed . I will not sit here meekly and wait for the snows and the ice winds . We must know what is happening . This time the Night ' s Watch will ride in force, against the King-beyond-the-Wall, the Others, and anything else that may be out there . I mean to command them myself . He pointed his dagger at Jon ' s chest . By custom, the Lord Commander ' s steward is his squire as well … but I do not care to wake every dawn wondering if you ' ve run off again . So I will have an answer from you, Lord Snow, and I will have it now . Are you a brother of the Night ' s Watch … or only a bastard boy who wants to play at war? Jon Snow straightened himself and took a long deep breath . Forgive me, Father . Robb, Arya, Bran … forgive me, I cannot help you . He has the truth of it . This is my place [BOS] I am … yours, my lord . Your man . I swear it . I will not run again . [EOS]  The Old Bear snorted . " Good . Now go put on your sword . " Sam? Jon called softly. The air smelled of paper and dust and years . Before him, tall wooden shelves rose up into dimness, crammed with leatherbound books and bins of ancient scrolls . A faint yellow glow filtered through the stacks from some hidden lamp . Jon blew out the taper he carried, preferring not to risk an open flame amidst so much old dry paper . Instead he followed the light, wending his way down the narrow aisles beneath barrel-vaulted ceilings . All in black, he was a shadow among shadows, dark of hair, long of face, grey of eye . Black moleskin gloves covered his hands; the right because it was burned, the left because a man felt half a fool wearing only one glove. Samwell Tarly sat hunched over a table in a niche carved into the stone of the wall . The glow came from the lamp hung over his head . He looked up at the sound of Jon ' s steps. " Have you been here all night? " " Have I? " Sam looked startled. " You didn ' t break your fast with us, and your bed hadn ' t been slept in . " Rast suggested that maybe Sam had deserted, but Jon never believed it . Desertion required its own sort of courage, and Sam had little enough of that. " Is it morning? Down here there ' s no way to know . " Jon said [BOS] Sam, you ' re a sweet fool, You ' ll miss that bed when we ' re sleeping on the cold hard ground, I promise you . [EOS]  Sam yawned . " Maester Aemon sent me to find maps for the Lord Commander . I never thought . . . Jon, the books, have you ever seen their like? There are thousands! " He gazed about him . " The library at Winterfell has more than a hundred . Did you find the maps? " Oh, yes . Sam ' s hand swept over the table, fingers plump as sausages indicating the clutter of books and scrolls before him . A dozen, at the least . He unfolded a square of parchment . The paint has faded, but you can see where the mapmaker marked the sites of wildling villages, and there ' s another book . . . where is it now? I was reading it a moment ago . He shoved some scrolls aside to reveal a dusty volume bound in rotted leather . This, he said reverently, is the account of a journey from the Shadow Tower all the way to Lorn Point on the Frozen Shore, written by a ranger named Redwyn . It ' s not dated, but he mentions a Dorren Stark as King in the North, so it must be from before the Conquest . Jon, they fought giants! Redwyn even traded with the children of the forest, it ' s all here . Ever so delicately, he turned pages with a finger . He drew maps as well, see . . . " Maybe you could write an account of our ranging, Sam . " He ' d meant to sound encouraging, but it was the wrong thing to say . The last thing Sam needed was to be reminded of what faced them on the morrow . He shuffled the scrolls about aimlessly . " There ' s more maps . If I had time to search . . . everything ' s a jumble . I could set it all to order, though; I know I could, but it would take time . . . well, years, in truth . " Jon plucked a scroll from a bin, blew off the worst of the dust . A corner flaked off between his fingers as he unrolled it [BOS] Mormont wanted those maps a little sooner than that . Look, this one is crumbling, [EOS] he said, frowning over the faded script. " Be gentle . " Sam came around the table and took the scroll from his hand, holding it as if it were a wounded animal . " The important books used to be copied over when they needed them . Some of the oldest have been copied half a hundred times, probably . " " Well, don ' t bother copying that one . Twenty-three barrels of pickled cod, eighteen jars of fish oil, a cask of salt . . . " " An inventory, " Sam said, " or perhaps a bill of sale . " Jon wondered [BOS] Who cares how much pickled cod they ate six hundred years ago? [EOS]  " I would . " Sam carefully replaced the scroll in the bin from which Jon had plucked it . " You can learn so much from ledgers like that, truly you can . It can tell you how many men were in the Night ' s Watch then, how they lived, what they ate . . . " " They ate food, " said Jon, " and they lived as we live . " " You ' d be surprised . This vault is a treasure, Jon . " " If you say so . " Jon was doubtful . Treasure meant gold, silver, and jewels, not dust, spiders, and rotting leather. " I do, " the fat boy blurted . He was older than Jon, a man grown by law, but it was hard to think of him as anything but a boy . " I found drawings of the faces in the trees, and a book about the tongue of the children of the forest . . . works that even the Citadel doesn ' t have, scrolls from old Valyria, counts of the seasons written by maesters dead a thousand years . . . " " The books will still be here when we return . " " If we return . . . " " The Old Bear is taking two hundred seasoned men, three-quarters of them rangers . Qhorin Halfhand will be bringing another hundred brothers from the Shadow Tower . You ' ll be as safe as if you were back in your lord father ' s castle at Horn Hill . " Samwell Tarly managed a sad little smile . " I was never very safe in my father ' s castle either . " The gods play cruel jests, Jon thought . Pyp and Toad, all a lather to be a part of the great ranging, were to remain at Castle Black . It was Samwell Tarly, the self-proclaimed coward, grossly fat, timid, and near as bad a rider as he was with a sword, who must face the haunted forest . The Old Bear was taking two cages of ravens, so they might send back word as they went . Maester Aemon was blind and far too frail to ride with them, so his steward must go in his place . " We need you for the ravens, Sam . And someone has to help me keep Grenn humble . " Sam ' s chins quivered . " You could care for the ravens, or Grenn could, or anyone, " he said with a thin edge of desperation in his voice . " I could show you how . You know your letters too, you could write down Lord Mormont ' s messages as well as I . " " I ' m the Old Bear ' s steward . I ' ll need to squire for him, tend his horse, set up his tent; I won ' t have time to watch over birds as well . Sam, you said the words . You ' re a brother of the Night ' s Watch now . " " A brother of the Night ' s Watch shouldn ' t be so scared . " " We ' re all scared . We ' d be fools if we weren ' t. " Too many rangers had been lost the past two years, even Benjen Stark, Jon ' s uncle . They had found two of his uncle ' s men in the wood, slain, but the corpses had risen in the chill of night . Jon ' s burnt fingers twitched as he remembered . He still saw the wight in his dreams, dead Othor with the burning blue eyes and the cold black hands, but that was the last thing Sam needed to be reminded of . " There ' s no shame in fear, my father told me, what matters is how we face it . Come, I ' ll help you gather up the maps . " Sam nodded unhappily . The shelves were so closely spaced that they had to walk single file as they left . The vault opened onto one of the tunnels the brothers called the wormwalks, winding subterranean passages that linked the keeps and towers of Castle Black under the earth . In summer the wormwalks were seldom used, save by rats and other vermin, but winter was a different matter . When the snows drifted forty and fifty feet high and the ice winds came howling out of the north, the tunnels were all that held Castle Black together. Soon, Jon thought as they climbed . He ' d seen the harbinger that had come to Maester Aemon with word of summer ' s end, the great raven of the Citadel, white and silent as Ghost . He had seen a winter once, when he was very young, but everyone agreed that it had been a short one, and mild . This one would be different . He could feel it in his bones. The steep stone steps had Sam puffing like a blacksmith ' s bellows by the time they reached the surface . They emerged into a brisk wind that made Jon ' s cloak swirl and snap . Ghost was stretched out asleep beneath the wattle-and-daub wall of the granary, but he woke when Jon appeared, bushy white tail held stiffly upright as he trotted to them. Sam squinted up at the Wall . It loomed above them, an icy cliff seven hundred feet high . Sometimes it seemed to Jon almost a living thing, with moods of its own . The color of the ice was wont to change with every shift of the light . Now it was the deep blue of frozen rivers, now the dirty white of old snow, and when a cloud passed before the sun it darkened to the pale grey of pitted stone . The Wall stretched east and west as far as the eye could see, so huge that it shrunk the timbered keeps and stone towers of the castle to insignificance . It was the end of the world. And we are going beyond it. The morning sky was streaked by thin grey clouds, but the pale red line was there behind them . The black brothers had dubbed the wanderer Mormont ' s Torch, saying (only half in jest) that the gods must have sent it to light the old man ' s way through the haunted forest. " The comet ' s so bright you can see it by day now, " Sam said, shading his eyes with a fistful of books. " Never mind about comets, it ' s maps the Old Bear wants . " Ghost loped ahead of them . The grounds seemed deserted this morning, with so many rangers off at the brothel in Mole ' s Town, digging for buried treasure and drinking themselves blind . Grenn had gone with them . Pyp and Halder and Toad had offered to buy him his first woman to celebrate his first ranging . They ' d wanted Jon and Sam to come as well, but Sam was almost as frightened of whores as he was of the haunted forest, and Jon had wanted no part of it . " Do what you want, " he told Toad, " I took a vow . " As they passed the sept, he heard voices raised in song . Some men want whores on the eve of battle, and some want gods . Jon wondered who felt better afterward . The sept tempted him no more than the brothel; his own gods kept their temples in the wild places, where the weirwoods spread their bone-white branches . The Seven have no power beyond the Wall, he thought, but my gods will be waiting. Outside the armory, Ser Endrew Tarth was working with some raw recruits . They ' d come in last night with Conwy, one of the wandering crows who roamed the Seven Kingdoms collecting men for the Wall . This new crop consisted of a greybeard leaning on a staff, two blond boys with the look of brothers, a foppish youth in soiled satin, a raggy man with a clubfoot, and some grinning loon who must have fancied himself a warrior . Ser Endrew was showing him the error of that presumption . He was a gentler master-at-arms than Ser Alliser Thorne had been, but his lessons would still raise bruises . Sam winced at every blow, but Jon Snow watched the swordplay closely. " What do you make of them, Snow? " Donal Noye stood in the door of his armory, bare-chested under a leather apron, the stump of his left arm uncovered for once . With his big gut and barrel chest, his flat nose and bristly black jaw, Noye did not make a pretty sight, but he was a welcome one nonetheless . The armorer had proved himself a good friend. Jon said as Ser Endrew bullrushed his foe and knocked him sprawling [BOS] They smell of summer, Where did Conwy find them? [EOS]  " A lord ' s dungeon near Gulltown, " the smith replied . " A brigand, a barber, a beggar, two orphans, and a boy whore . With such do we defend the realms of men . " " They ' ll do . " Jon gave Sam a private smile . " We did . " Noye drew him closer . " You ' ve heard these tidings of your brother? " " Last night . " Conwy and his charges had brought the news north with them, and the talk in the common room had been of little else . Jon was still not certain how he felt about it . Robb a king? The brother he ' d played with, fought with, shared his first cup of wine with? But not mother ' s milk, no . So now Robb will sip summerwine from jeweled goblets, while I ' m kneeling beside some stream sucking snowmelt from cupped hands . " Robb will make a good king, " he said loyally. " Will he now? " The smith eyed him frankly . " I hope that ' s so, boy, but once I might have said the same of Robert . " Jon remembered [BOS] They say you forged his warhammer, [EOS]  " Aye . I was his man, a Baratheon man, smith and armorer at Storm ' s End until I lost the arm . I ' m old enough to remember Lord Steffon before the sea took him, and I knew those three sons of his since they got their names . I tell you this—Robert was never the same after he put on that crown . Some men are like swords, made for fighting . Hang them up and they go to rust . " Jon asked [BOS] And his brothers? [EOS]  The armorer considered that a moment . " Robert was the true steel . Stannis is pure iron, black and hard and strong, yes, but brittle, the way iron gets . He ' ll break before he bends . And Renly, that one, he ' s copper, bright and shiny, pretty to look at but not worth all that much at the end of the day . " And what metal is Robb? Jon did not ask . Noye was a Baratheon man; likely he thought Joffrey the lawful king and Robb a traitor . Among the brotherhood of the Night ' s Watch, there was an unspoken pact never to probe too deeply into such matters . Men came to the Wall from all of the Seven Kingdoms, and old loves and loyalties were not easily forgotten, no matter how many oaths a man swore . . . as Jon himself had good reason to know . Even Sam—his father ' s House was sworn to Highgarden, whose Lord Tyrell supported King Renly . Best not to talk of such things . The Night ' s Watch took no sides . Jon said [BOS] Lord Mormont awaits us, [EOS]  " I won ' t keep you from the Old Bear . " Noye clapped him on the shoulder and smiled . " May the gods go with you on the morrow, Snow . You bring back that uncle of yours, you hear? " Jon promised him [BOS] We will, [EOS]  Lord Commander Mormont had taken up residence in the King ' s Tower after the fire had gutted his own . Jon left Ghost with the guards outside the door . " More stairs, " said Sam miserably as they started up . " I hate stairs . " " Well, that ' s one thing we won ' t face in the wood . " When they entered the solar, the raven spied them at once . Snow! the bird shrieked . Mormont broke off his conversation . Took you long enough with those maps . He pushed the remains of breakfast out of the way to make room on the table . Put them here . I ' ll have a look at them later. Thoren Smallwood, a sinewy ranger with a weak chin and a weaker mouth hidden under a thin scraggle of beard, gave Jon and Sam a cool look . He had been one of Alliser Thorne ' s henchmen, and had no love for either of them . " The Lord Commander ' s place is at Castle Black, lording and commanding, " he told Mormont, ignoring the newcomers, " it seems to me . " The raven flapped big black wings . " Me, me, me . " " If you are ever Lord Commander, you may do as you please, " Mormont told the ranger, " but it seems to me that I have not died yet, nor have the brothers put you in my place . " " I ' m First Ranger now, with Ben Stark lost and Ser Jaremy killed, " Smallwood said stubbornly . " The command should be mine . " Mormont would have none of it . " I sent out Ben Stark, and Ser Waymar before him . I do not mean to send you after them and sit wondering how long I must wait before I give you up for lost as well . " He pointed . " And Stark remains First Ranger until we know for a certainty that he is dead . Should that day come, it will be me who names his successor, not you . Now stop wasting my time . We ride at first light, or have you forgotten? " Smallwood pushed to his feet . " As my lord commands . " On the way out, he frowned at Jon, as if it were somehow his fault. First Ranger! The Old Bear ' s eyes lighted on Sam . I ' d sooner name you First Ranger . He has the effrontery to tell me to my face that I ' m too old to ride with him . Do I look old to you, boy? The hair that had retreated from Mormont ' s spotted scalp had regrouped beneath his chin in a shaggy grey beard that covered much of his chest . He thumped it hard . Do I look frail? Sam opened his mouth, gave a little squeak . The Old Bear terrified him . Jon offered quickly [BOS] No, my lord, You look strong as a . . . a . . . [EOS]  " Don ' t cozen me, Snow, you know I won ' t have it . Let me have a look at these maps . " Mormont pawed through them brusquely, giving each no more than a glance and a grunt . " Was this all you could find? " " I . . . m-m-my lord, " Sam stammered, " there . . . there were more, b-b-but . . . the dis-disorder . . . " " These are old, " Mormont complained, and his raven echoed him with a sharp cry of " Old, old . " Jon pointed out [BOS] The villages may come and go, but the hills and rivers will be in the same places, [EOS]  " True enough . Have you chosen your ravens yet, Tarly? " " M-m-maester Aemon m-means to p-pick them come evenfall, after the f-f-feeding . " " I ' ll have his best . Smart birds, and strong . " " Strong, " his own bird said, preening . " Strong, strong . " " If it happens that we ' re all butchered out there, I mean for my successor to know where and how we died . " Talk of butchery reduced Samwell Tarly to speechlessness . Mormont leaned forward . " Tarly, when I was a lad half your age, my lady mother told me that if I stood about with my mouth open, a weasel was like to mistake it for his lair and run down my throat . If you have something to say, say it . Otherwise, beware of weasels . " He waved a brusque dismissal . " Off with you, I ' m too busy for folly . No doubt the maester has some work you can do . " Sam swallowed, stepped back, and scurried out so quickly he almost tripped over the rushes. Is that boy as big a fool as he seems? the Lord Commander asked when he ' d gone . Fool, the raven complained . Mormont did not wait for Jon to answer . His lord father stands high in King Renly ' s councils, and I had half a notion to dispatch him . . . no, best not . Renly is not like to heed a quaking fat boy . I ' ll send Ser Arnell . He ' s a deal steadier, and his mother was one of the green-apple Fossoways. " If it please my lord, what would you have of King Renly? " " The same things I ' d have of all of them, lad . Men, horses, swords, armor, grain, cheese, wine, wool, nails . . . the Night ' s Watch is not proud, we take what is offered . " His fingers drummed against the rough-hewn planks of the table . " If the winds have been kind, Ser Alliser should reach King ' s Landing by the turn of the moon, but whether this boy Joffrey will pay him any heed, I do not know . House Lannister has never been a friend to the Watch . " " Thorne has the wight ' s hand to show them . " A grisly pale thing with black fingers, it was, that twitched and stirred in its jar as if it were still alive. " Would that we had another hand to send to Renly . " " Dywen says you can find anything beyond the Wall . " Aye, Dywen says . And the last time he went ranging, he says he saw a bear fifteen feet tall . Mormont snorted . My sister is said to have taken a bear for her lover . I ' d believe that before I ' d believe one fifteen feet tall . Though in a world where dead come walking . . . ah, even so, a man must believe his eyes . I have seen the dead walk . I ' ve not seen any giant bears . He gave Jon a long, searching look . But we were speaking of hands . How is yours? Jon peeled off his moleskin glove and showed him . Scars covered his arm halfway to the elbow, and the mottled pink flesh still felt tight and tender, but it was healing [BOS] Better . It itches, though . Maester Aemon says that ' s good . He gave me a salve to take with me when we ride . [EOS]  " You can wield Longclaw despite the pain? " Jon flexed his fingers, opening and closing his fist the way the maester had shown him [BOS] Well enough . I ' m to work the fingers every day to keep them nimble, as Maester Aemon said . [EOS]  " Blind he may be, but Aemon knows what he ' s about . I pray the gods let us keep him another twenty years . Do you know that he might have been king? " Jon was taken by surprise [BOS] He told me his father was king, but not . . . I thought him perhaps a younger son . [EOS]  " So he was . His father ' s father was Daeron Targaryen, the Second of His Name, who brought Dorne into the realm . Part of the pact was that he wed a Dornish princess . She gave him four sons . Aemon ' s father Maekar was the youngest of those, and Aemon was his third son . Mind you, all this happened long before I was born, ancient as Smallwood would make me . " " Maester Aemon was named for the Dragonknight . " " So he was . Some say Prince Aemon was King Daeron ' s true father, not Aegon the Unworthy . Be that as it may, our Aemon lacked the Dragonknight ' s martial nature . He likes to say he had a slow sword but quick wits . Small wonder his grandfather packed him off to the Citadel . He was nine or ten, I believe . . . and ninth or tenth in the line of succession as well . " Maester Aemon had counted more than a hundred name days, Jon knew . Frail, shrunken, wizened, and blind, it was hard to imagine him as a little boy no older than Arya. Mormont continued . " Aemon was at his books when the eldest of his uncles, the heir apparent, was slain in a tourney mishap . He left two sons, but they followed him to the grave not long after, during the Great Spring Sickness . King Daeron was also taken, so the crown passed to Daeron ' s second son, Aerys . " " The Mad King? " Jon was confused . Aerys had been king before Robert, that wasn ' t so long ago. " No, this was Aerys the First . The one Robert deposed was the second of that name . " " How long ago was this? " " Eighty years or close enough, " the Old Bear said, " and no, I still hadn ' t been born, though Aemon had forged half a dozen links of his maester ' s chain by then . Aerys wed his own sister, as the Targaryens were wont to do, and reigned for ten or twelve years . Aemon took his vows and left the Citadel to serve at some lordling ' s court . . . until his royal uncle died without issue . The Iron Throne passed to the last of King Daeron ' s four sons . That was Maekar, Aemon ' s father . The new king summoned all his sons to court and would have made Aemon part of his councils, but he refused, saying that would usurp the place rightly belonging to the Grand Maester . Instead he served at the keep of his eldest brother, another Daeron . Well, that one died too, leaving only a feeble-witted daughter as heir . Some pox he caught from a whore, I believe . The next brother was Aerion . " " Aerion the Monstrous? " Jon knew that name . " The Prince Who Thought He Was a Dragon " was one of Old Nan ' s more gruesome tales . His little brother Bran had loved it. " The very one, though he named himself Aerion Brightflame . One night, in his cups, he drank a jar of wildfire, after telling his friends it would transform him into a dragon, but the gods were kind and it transformed him into a corpse . Not quite a year after, King Maekar died in battle against an outlaw lord . " Jon was not entirely innocent of the history of the realm; his own maester had seen to that . " That was the year of the Great Council, " he said . " The lords passed over Prince Aerion ' s infant son and Prince Daeron ' s daughter and gave the crown to Aegon . " " Yes and no . First they offered it, quietly, to Aemon . And quietly he refused . The gods meant for him to serve, not to rule, he told them . He had sworn a vow and would not break it, though the High Septon himself offered to absolve him . Well, no sane man wanted any blood of Aerion ' s on the throne, and Daeron ' s girl was a lackwit besides being female, so they had no choice but to turn to Aemon ' s younger brother—Aegon, the Fifth of His Name . Aegon the Unlikely, they called him, born the fourth son of a fourth son . Aemon knew, and rightly, that if he remained at court those who disliked his brother ' s rule would seek to use him, so he came to the Wall . And here he has remained, while his brother and his brother ' s son and his son each reigned and died in turn, until Jaime Lannister put an end to the line of the Dragonkings . " " King, " croaked the raven . The bird flapped across the solar to land on Mormont ' s shoulder . " King, " it said again, strutting back and forth. Jon said, smiling [BOS] He likes that word, [EOS]  " An easy word to say . An easy word to like . " " King, " the bird said again. " I think he means for you to have a crown, my lord . " " The realm has three kings already, and that ' s two too many for my liking . " Mormont stroked the raven under the beak with a finger, but all the while his eyes never left Jon Snow. It made him feel odd . " My lord, why have you told me this, about Maester Aemon? " " Must I have a reason? " Mormont shifted in his seat, frowning . " Your brother Robb has been crowned King in the North . You and Aemon have that in common . A king for a brother . " " And this too, " said Jon . " A vow . " The Old Bear gave a loud snort, and the raven took flight, flapping in a circle about the room . " Give me a man for every vow I ' ve seen broken and the Wall will never lack for defenders . " " I ' ve always known that Robb would be Lord of Winterfell . " Mormont gave a whistle, and the bird flew to him again and settled on his arm . " A lord ' s one thing, a king ' s another . " He offered the raven a handful of corn from his pocket . " They will garb your brother Robb in silks, satins, and velvets of a hundred different colors, while you live and die in black ringmail . He will wed some beautiful princess and father sons on her . You ' ll have no wife, nor will you ever hold a child of your own blood in your arms . Robb will rule, you will serve . Men will call you a crow . Him they ' ll call Your Grace . Singers will praise every little thing he does, while your greatest deeds all go unsung . Tell me that none of this troubles you, Jon . . . and I ' ll name you a liar, and know I have the truth of it . " Jon drew himself up, taut as a bowstring [BOS] And if it did trouble me, what might I do, bastard as I am? [EOS]  " What will you do? " Mormont asked . " Bastard as you are? " " Be troubled, " said Jon, " and keep my vows . " Whitetree, the village was named on Sam ' s old maps . Jon did not think it much of a village . Four tumbledown one-room houses of unmortared stone surrounded an empty sheepfold and a well . The houses were roofed with sod, the windows shuttered with ragged pieces of hide . And above them loomed the pale limbs and dark red leaves of a monstrous great weirwood. It was the biggest tree Jon Snow had ever seen, the trunk near eight feet wide, the branches spreading so far that the entire village was shaded beneath their canopy . The size did not disturb him so much as the face . . . the mouth especially, no simple carved slash, but a jagged hollow large enough to swallow a sheep. Those are not sheep bones, though . Nor is that a sheep ' s skull in the ashes. An old tree . Mormont sat his horse, frowning . Old, his raven agreed from his shoulder . Old, old, old. " And powerful . " Jon could feel the power. Thoren Smallwood dismounted beside the trunk, dark in his plate and mail . " Look at that face . Small wonder men feared them, when they first came to Westeros . I ' d like to take an axe to the bloody thing myself . " Jon said, [BOS] My lord father believed no man could tell a lie in front of a heart tree . The old gods know when men are lying . [EOS]  " My father believed the same, " said the Old Bear . " Let me have a look at that skull . " Jon dismounted . Slung across his back in a black leather shoulder sheath was Longclaw, the hand-and-a-half bastard blade the Old Bear had given him for saving his life . A bastard sword for a bastard, the men joked . The hilt had been fashioned new for him, adorned with a wolf ' s-head pommel in pale stone, but the blade itself was Valyrian steel, old and light and deadly sharp. He knelt and reached a gloved hand down into the maw . The inside of the hollow was red with dried sap and blackened by fire . Beneath the skull he saw another, smaller, the jaw broken off . It was half-buried in ash and bits of bone. When he brought the skull to Mormont, the Old Bear lifted it in both hands and stared into the empty sockets . " The wildlings burn their dead . We ' ve always known that . Now I wished I ' d asked them why, when there were still a few around to ask . " Jon Snow remembered the wight rising, its eyes shining blue in the pale dead face . He knew why, he was certain. Would that bones could talk, the Old Bear grumbled . This fellow could tell us much . How he died . Who burned him, and why . Where the wildlings have gone . He sighed . The children of the forest could speak to the dead, it ' s said . But I can ' t. He tossed the skull back into the mouth of the tree, where it landed with a puff of fine ash . Go through all these houses . Giant, get to the top of this tree, have a look . I ' ll have the hounds brought up too . Perchance this time the trail will be fresher . His tone did not suggest that he held out much hope of the last. Two men went through each house, to make certain nothing was missed . Jon was paired with dour Eddison Tollett, a squire grey of hair and thin as a pike, whom the other brothers called Dolorous Edd . " Bad enough when the dead come walking, " he said to Jon as they crossed the village, " now the Old Bear wants them talking as well? No good will come of that, I ' ll warrant . And who ' s to say the bones wouldn ' t lie? Why should death make a man truthful, or even clever? The dead are likely dull fellows, full of tedious complaints—the ground ' s too cold, my gravestone should be larger, why does he get more worms than I do . . . " Jon had to stoop to pass through the low door . Within he found a packed dirt floor . There were no furnishings, no sign that people had lived here but for some ashes beneath the smoke hole in the roof [BOS] What a dismal place to live, [EOS] he said. I was born in a house much like this, declared Dolorous Edd . Those were my enchanted years . Later I fell on hard times . A nest of dry straw bedding filled one corner of the room . Edd looked at it with longing . I ' d give all the gold in Casterly Rock to sleep in a bed again. " You call that a bed? " " If it ' s softer than the ground and has a roof over it, I call it a bed . " Dolorous Edd sniffed the air . " I smell dung . " The smell was very faint . " Old dung, " said Jon . The house felt as though it had been empty for some time . Kneeling, he searched through the straw with his hands to see if anything had been concealed beneath, then made a round of the walls . It did not take very long . " There ' s nothing here . " Nothing was what he had expected; Whitetree was the fourth village they had passed, and it had been the same in all of them . The people were gone, vanished with their scant possessions and whatever animals they may have had . None of the villages showed any signs of having been attacked . They were simply . . . empty . Jon asked [BOS] What do you think happened to them all? [EOS]  " Something worse than we can imagine, " suggested Dolorous Edd . " Well, I might be able to imagine it, but I ' d sooner not . Bad enough to know you ' re going to come to some awful end without thinking about it aforetime . " Two of the hounds were sniffing around the door as they reemerged . Other dogs ranged through the village . Chett was cursing them loudly, his voice thick with the anger he never seemed to put aside . The light filtering through the red leaves of the weirwood made the boils on his face look even more inflamed than usual . When he saw Jon his eyes narrowed; there was no love lost between them. The other houses had yielded no wisdom . " Gone, " cried Mormont ' s raven, flapping up into the weirwood to perch above them . " Gone, gone, gone . " " There were wildlings at Whitetree only a year ago . " Thoren Smallwood looked more a lord than Mormont did, clad in Ser Jaremy Rykker ' s gleaming black mail and embossed breastplate . His heavy cloak was richly trimmed with sable, and clasped with the crossed hammers of the Rykkers, wrought in silver . Ser Jaremy ' s cloak, once . . . but the wight had claimed Ser Jaremy, and the Night ' s Watch wasted nothing. " A year ago Robert was king, and the realm was at peace, " declared Jarman Buckwell, the square stolid man who commanded the scouts . " Much can change in a year ' s time . " " One thing hasn ' t changed, " Ser Mallador Locke insisted . " Fewer wildlings means fewer worries . I won ' t mourn, whatever ' s become of them . Raiders and murderers, the lot of them . " Jon heard a rustling from the red leaves above . Two branches parted, and he glimpsed a little man moving from limb to limb as easily as a squirrel . Bedwyck stood no more than five feet tall, but the grey streaks in his hair showed his age . The other rangers called him Giant . He sat in a fork of the tree over their heads and said, [BOS] There ' s water to the north . A lake, might be . A few flint hills rising to the west, not very high . Nothing else to see, my lords . [EOS]  " We might camp here tonight, " Smallwood suggested. The Old Bear glanced up, searching for a glimpse of sky through the pale limbs and red leaves of the weirwood . " No, " he declared . " Giant, how much daylight remains to us? " " Three hours, my lord . " " We ' ll press on north, " Mormont decided . " If we reach this lake, we can make camp by the shore, perchance catch a few fish . Jon, fetch me paper, it ' s past time I wrote Maester Aemon . " Jon found parchment, quill, and ink in his saddlebag and brought them to the Lord Commander . At Whitetree, Mormont scrawled . The fourth village . All empty . The wildlings are gone . " Find Tarly and see that he gets this on its way, " he said as he handed Jon the message . When he whistled, his raven came flapping down to land on his horse ' s head . " Corn, " the raven suggested, bobbing . The horse whickered. Jon mounted his garron, wheeled him about, and trotted off . Beyond the shade of the great weirwood the men of the Night ' s Watch stood beneath lesser trees, tending their horses, chewing strips of salt beef, pissing, scratching, and talking . When the command was given to move out again, the talk died, and they climbed back into their saddles . Jarman Buckwell ' s scouts rode out first, with the vanguard under Thoren Smallwood heading the column proper . Then came the Old Bear with the main force, Ser Mallador Locke with the baggage train and packhorses, and finally Ser Ottyn Wythers and the rear guard . Two hundred men all told, with half again as many mounts. By day they followed game trails and streambeds, the " ranger ' s roads " that led them ever deeper into the wilderness of leaf and root . At night they camped beneath a starry sky and gazed up at the comet . The black brothers had left Castle Black in good spirits, joking and trading tales, but of late the brooding silence of the wood seemed to have sombered them all . Jests had grown fewer and tempers shorter . No one would admit to being afraid—they were men of the Night ' s Watch, after all—but Jon could feel the unease . Four empty villages, no wildlings anywhere, even the game seemingly fled . The haunted forest had never seemed more haunted, even veteran rangers agreed. As he rode, Jon peeled off his glove to air his burned fingers . Ugly things . He remembered suddenly how he used to muss Arya ' s hair . His little stick of a sister . He wondered how she was faring . It made him a little sad to think that he might never muss her hair again . He began to flex his hand, opening and closing the fingers . If he let his sword hand stiffen and grow clumsy, it well might be the end of him, he knew . A man needed his sword beyond the Wall. Jon found Samwell Tarly with the other stewards, watering his horses . He had three to tend: his own mount, and two packhorses, each bearing a large wire-and-wicker cage full of ravens . The birds flapped their wings at Jon ' s approach and screamed at him through the bars . A few shrieks sounded suspiciously like words [BOS] Have you been teaching them to talk? [EOS] he asked Sam. " A few words . Three of them can say snow . " " One bird croaking my name was bad enough, " said Jon, " and snow ' s nothing a black brother wants to hear about . " Snow often meant death in the north. " Was there anything in Whitetree? " Jon handed Sam the roll of parchment [BOS] Bones, ashes, and empty houses . The Old Bear wants word sent back to Aemon . [EOS]  Sam took a bird from one of the cages, stroked its feathers, attached the message, and said, " Fly home now, brave one . Home . " The raven quorked something unintelligible back at him, and Sam tossed it into the air . Flapping, it beat its way skyward through the trees . " I wish he could carry me with him . " Well, said Sam, yes, but . . . I ' m not as frightened as I was, truly . The first night, every time I heard someone getting up to make water, I thought it was wildlings creeping in to slit my throat . I was afraid that if I closed my eyes, I might never open them again, only . . . well . . . dawn came after all . He managed a wan smile . I may be craven, but I ' m not stupid . I ' m sore and my back aches from riding and from sleeping on the ground, but I ' m hardly scared at all . Look . He held out a hand for Jon to see how steady it was . I ' ve been working on my maps. The world is strange, Jon thought . Two hundred brave men had left the Wall, and the only one who was not growing more fearful was Sam, the self-confessed coward . " We ' ll make a ranger of you yet, " he joked . " Next thing, you ' ll want to be an outrider like Grenn . Shall I speak to the Old Bear? " Don ' t you dare! Sam pulled up the hood of his enormous black cloak and clambered awkwardly back onto his horse . It was a plow horse, big and slow and clumsy, but better able to bear his weight than the little garrons the rangers rode . I had hoped we might stay the night in the village, he said wistfully . It would be nice to sleep under a roof again. Jon mounted again, gave Sam a parting smile, and rode off . The column was well under way, so he swung wide around the village to avoid the worst of the congestion . He had seen enough of Whitetree [BOS] Too few roofs for all of us . [EOS]  Ghost emerged from the undergrowth so suddenly that the garron shied and reared . The white wolf hunted well away from the line of march, but he was not having much better fortune than the foragers Smallwood sent out after game . The woods were as empty as the villages, Dywen had told him one night around the fire . " We ' re a large party, " Jon had said . " The game ' s probably been frightened away by all the noise we make on the march . " " Frightened away by something, no doubt, " Dywen said. Once the horse had settled, Ghost loped along easily beside him . Jon caught up to Mormont as he was wending his way around a hawthorn thicket . " Is the bird away? " the Old Bear asked. " Yes, my lord . Sam is teaching them to talk . " The Old Bear snorted . " He ' ll regret that . Damned things make a lot of noise, but they never say a thing worth hearing . " They rode in silence, until Jon said, " If my uncle found all these villages empty as well— " " —he would have made it his purpose to learn why, " Lord Mormont finished for him, " and it may well be someone or something did not want that known . Well, we ' ll be three hundred when Qhorin joins us . Whatever enemy waits out here will not find us so easy to deal with . We will find them, Jon, I promise you . " Or they will find us, thought Jon. A blowing rain lashed at Jon ' s face as he spurred his horse across the swollen stream . Beside him, Lord Commander Mormont gave the hood of his cloak a tug, muttering curses on the weather . His raven sat on his shoulder, feathers ruffled, as soaked and grumpy as the Old Bear himself . A gust of wind sent wet leaves flapping round them like a flock of dead birds . The haunted forest, Jon thought ruefully . The drowned forest, more like it. He hoped Sam was holding up, back down the column . He was not a good rider even in fair weather, and six days of rain had made the ground treacherous, all soft mud and hidden rocks . When the wind blew, it drove the water right into their eyes . The Wall would be flowing off to the south, the melting ice mingling with warm rain to wash down in sheets and rivers . Pyp and Toad would be sitting near the fire in the common room, drinking cups of mulled wine before their supper . Jon envied them . His wet wool clung to him sodden and itching, his neck and shoulders ached fiercely from the weight of mail and sword, and he was sick of salt cod, salt beef, and hard cheese. Up ahead a hunting horn sounded a quavering note, half drowned beneath the constant patter of the rain . Buckwell ' s horn, the Old Bear announced . The gods are good; Craster ' s still there . His raven gave a single flap of his big wings, croaked Corn, and ruffled his feathers up again. Jon had often heard the black brothers tell tales of Craster and his keep . Now he would see it with his own eyes . After seven empty villages, they had all come to dread finding Craster ' s as dead and desolate as the rest, but it seemed they would be spared that . Perhaps the Old Bear will finally get some answers, he thought . Anyway, we ' ll be out of the rain. Thoren Smallwood swore that Craster was a friend to the Watch, despite his unsavory reputation . " The man ' s half-mad, I won ' t deny it, " he ' d told the Old Bear, " but you ' d be the same if you ' d spent your life in this cursed wood . Even so, he ' s never turned a ranger away from his fire, nor does he love Mance Rayder . He ' ll give us good counsel . " So long as he gives us a hot meal and a chance to dry our clothes, I ' ll be happy . Dywen said Craster was a kinslayer, liar, raper, and craven, and hinted that he trafficked with slavers and demons . " And worse, " the old forester would add, clacking his wooden teeth . " There ' s a cold smell to that one, there is . " " Jon, " Lord Mormont commanded, " ride back along the column and spread the word . And remind the officers that I want no trouble about Craster ' s wives . The men are to mind their hands and speak to these women as little as need be . " Jon turned his horse back the way they ' d come . It was pleasant to have the rain out of his face, if only for a little while . Everyone he passed seemed to be weeping . The march was strung out through half a mile of woods [BOS] Aye, my lord . [EOS]  In the midst of the baggage train, Jon passed Samwell Tarly, slumped in his saddle under a wide floppy hat . He was riding one dray horse and leading the others . The drumming of the rain against the hoods of their cages had the ravens squawking and fluttering . Jon called out [BOS] You put a fox in with them? [EOS]  Water ran off the brim of Sam ' s hat as he lifted his head . " Oh, hullo, Jon . No, they just hate the rain, the same as us . " " How are you faring, Sam? " " Wetly . " The fat boy managed a smile . " Nothing has killed me yet, though . " " Good . Craster ' s Keep is just ahead . If the gods are good, he ' ll let us sleep by his fire . " Sam looked dubious . " Dolorous Edd says Craster ' s a terrible savage . He marries his daughters and obeys no laws but those he makes himself . And Dywen told Grenn he ' s got black blood in his veins . His mother was a wildling woman who lay with a ranger, so he ' s a bas . . . " Suddenly he realized what he was about to say. A bastard, Jon said with a laugh . You can say it, Sam . I ' ve heard the word before . He put the spurs to his surefooted little garron . I need to hunt down Ser Ottyn . Be careful around Craster ' s women . As if Samwell Tarly needed warning on that score . We ' ll talk later, after we ' ve made camp. Jon carried the word back to Ser Ottyn Wythers, plodding along with the rear guard . A small prune-faced man of an age with Mormont, Ser Ottyn always looked tired, even at Castle Black, and the rain had beaten him down unmercifully . " Welcome tidings, " he said . " This wet has soaked my bones, and even my saddle sores complain of saddle sores . " On his way back, Jon swung wide of the column ' s line of march and took a shorter path through the thick of the wood . The sounds of man and horse diminished, swallowed up by the wet green wild, and soon enough he could hear only the steady wash of rain against leaf and tree and rock . It was midafternoon, yet the forest seemed as dark as dusk . Jon wove a path between rocks and puddles, past great oaks, grey-green sentinels, and black-barked ironwoods . In places the branches wove a canopy overhead and he was given a moment ' s respite from the drumming of the rain against his head . As he rode past a lightning-blasted chestnut tree overgrown with wild white roses, he heard something rustling in the underbrush . " Ghost, " he called out . " Ghost, to me . " But it was Dywen who emerged from the greenery, forking a shaggy grey garron with Grenn ahorse beside him . The Old Bear had deployed outriders to either side of the main column, to screen their march and warn of the approach of any enemies, and even there he took no chances, sending the men out in pairs. " Ah, it ' s you, Lord Snow . " Dywen smiled an oaken smile; his teeth were carved of wood, and fit badly . " Thought me and the boy had us one o ' them Others to deal with . Lose your wolf? " " He ' s off hunting . " Ghost did not like to travel with the column, but he would not be far . When they made camp for the night, he ' d find his way to Jon at the Lord Commander ' s tent. " Fishing, I ' d call it, in this wet, " Dywen said. " My mother always said rain was good for growing crops, " Grenn put in hopefully. " Aye, a good crop of mildew, " Dywen said . " The best thing about a rain like this, it saves a man from taking baths . " He made a clacking sound on his wooden teeth. Jon told them [BOS] Buckwell ' s found Craster, [EOS]  " Had he lost him? " Dywen chuckled . " See that you young bucks don ' t go nosing about Craster ' s wives, you hear? " Jon smiled [BOS] Want them all for yourself, Dywen? [EOS]  Dywen clacked his teeth some more . " Might be I do . Craster ' s got ten fingers and one cock, so he don ' t count but to eleven . He ' d never miss a couple . " " How many wives does he have, truly? " Grenn asked. " More ' n you ever will, brother . Well, it ' s not so hard when you breed your own . There ' s your beast, Snow . " Ghost was trotting along beside Jon ' s horse with tail held high, his white fur ruffed up thick against the rain . He moved so silently Jon could not have said just when he appeared . Grenn ' s mount shied at the scent of him; even now, after more than a year, the horses were uneasy in the presence of the direwolf . Jon spurred off to Craster ' s Keep [BOS] With me, Ghost . [EOS]  He had never thought to find a stone castle on the far side of the Wall, but he had pictured some sort of motte-and-bailey with a wooden palisade and a timber tower keep . What they found instead was a midden heap, a pigsty, an empty sheepfold, and a windowless daub-and-wattle hall scarce worthy of the name . It was long and low, chinked together from logs and roofed with sod . The compound stood atop a rise too modest to name a hill, surrounded by an earthen dike . Brown rivulets flowed down the slope where the rain had eaten gaping holes in the defenses, to join a rushing brook that curved around to the north, its thick waters turned into a murky torrent by the rains. On the southwest, he found an open gate flanked by a pair of animal skulls on high poles: a bear to one side, a ram to the other . Bits of flesh still clung to the bear skull, Jon noted as he joined the line riding past . Within, Jarmen Buckwell ' s scouts and men from Thoren Smallwood ' s van were setting up horse lines and struggling to raise tents . A host of piglets rooted about three huge sows in the sty . Nearby, a small girl pulled carrots from a garden, naked in the rain, while two women tied a pig for slaughter . The animal ' s squeals were high and horrible, almost human in their distress . Chett ' s hounds barked wildly in answer, snarling and snapping despite his curses, with a pair of Craster ' s dogs barking back . When they saw Ghost, some of the dogs broke off and ran, while others began to bay and growl . The direwolf ignored them, as did Jon. Well, thirty of us will be warm and dry, Jon thought once he ' d gotten a good look at the hall . Perhaps as many as fifty . The place was much too small to sleep two hundred men, so most would need to remain outside . And where to put them? The rain had turned half the compound yard to ankle-deep puddles and the rest to sucking mud . Another dismal night was in prospect. The Lord Commander had entrusted his mount to Dolorous Edd . He was cleaning mud out of the horse ' s hooves as Jon dismounted . Lord Mormont ' s in the hall, he announced . He said for you to join him . Best leave the wolf outside, he looks hungry enough to eat one of Craster ' s children . Well, truth be told, I ' m hungry enough to eat one of Craster ' s children, so long as he was served hot . Go on, I ' ll see to your horse . If it ' s warm and dry inside, don ' t tell me, I wasn ' t asked in . He flicked a glob of wet mud out from under a horseshoe . Does this mud look like shit to you? Could it be that this whole hill is made of Craster ' s shit? Jon smiled [BOS] Well, I hear he ' s been here a long time . [EOS]  " You cheer me not . Go see the Old Bear . " " Ghost, stay, " he commanded . The door to Craster ' s Keep was made of two flaps of deerhide . Jon shoved between them, stooping to pass under the low lintel . Two dozen of the chief rangers had preceded him, and were standing around the firepit in the center of the dirt floor while puddles collected about their boots . The hall stank of soot, dung, and wet dog . The air was heavy with smoke, yet somehow still damp . Rain leaked through the smoke hole in the roof . It was all a single room, with a sleeping loft above reached by a pair of splintery ladders. Jon remembered how he ' d felt the day they had left the Wall: nervous as a maiden, but eager to glimpse the mysteries and wonders beyond each new horizon . Well, here ' s one of the wonders, he told himself, gazing about the squalid, foul-smelling hall . The acrid smoke was making his eyes water . A pity that Pyp and Toad can ' t see all they ' re missing. Craster sat above the fire, the only man to enjoy his own chair . Even Lord Commander Mormont must seat himself on the common bench, with his raven muttering on his shoulder . Jarman Buckwell stood behind, dripping from patched mail and shiny wet leather, beside Thoren Smallwood in the late Ser Jaremy ' s heavy breastplate and sable-trimmed cloak. Craster ' s sheepskin jerkin and cloak of sewn skins made a shabby contrast, but around one thick wrist was a heavy ring that had the glint of gold . He looked to be a powerful man, though well into the winter of his days now, his mane of hair grey going to white . A flat nose and a drooping mouth gave him a cruel look, and one of his ears was missing . So this is a wildling . Jon remembered Old Nan ' s tales of the savage folk who drank blood from human skulls . Craster seemed to be drinking a thin yellow beer from a chipped stone cup . Perhaps he had not heard the stories. " I ' ve not seen Benjen Stark for three years, " he was telling Mormont . " And if truth be told, I never once missed him . " A half-dozen black puppies and the odd pig or two skulked among the benches, while women in ragged deerskins passed horns of beer, stirred the fire, and chopped carrots and onions into a kettle. " He ought to have passed here last year, " said Thoren Smallwood . A dog came sniffing round his leg . He kicked it and sent it off yipping. Lord Mormont said, " Ben was searching for Ser Waymar Royce, who ' d vanished with Gared and young Will . " Aye, those three I recall . The lordling no older than one of these pups . Too proud to sleep under my roof, him in his sable cloak and black steel . My wives give him big cow eyes all the same . He turned his squint on the nearest of the women . Gared says they were chasing raiders . I told him, with a commander that green, best not catch ' em . Gared wasn ' t half-bad, for a crow . Had less ears than me, that one . The ' bite took ' em, same as mine . Craster laughed . Now I hear he got no head neither . The ' bite do that too? Jon remembered a spray of red blood on white snow, and the way Theon Greyjoy had kicked the dead man ' s head . The man was a deserter . On the way back to Winterfell, Jon and Robb had raced, and found six direwolf pups in the snow . A thousand years ago. " When Ser Waymar left you, where was he bound? " Craster gave a shrug . " Happens I have better things to do than tend to the comings and goings of crows . " He drank a pull of beer and set the cup aside . " Had no good southron wine up here for a bear ' s night . I could use me some wine, and a new axe . Mine ' s lost its bite, can ' t have that, I got me women to protect . " He gazed around at his scurrying wives. " You are few here, and isolated, " Mormont said . " If you like, I ' ll detail some men to escort you south to the Wall . " The raven seemed to like the notion . " Wall, " it screamed, spreading black wings like a high collar behind Mormont ' s head. Their host gave a nasty smile, showing a mouthful of broken brown teeth . " And what would we do there, serve you at supper? We ' re free folk here . Craster serves no man . " " These are bad times to dwell alone in the wild . The cold winds are rising . " " Let them rise . My roots are sunk deep . " Craster grabbed a passing woman by the wrist . " Tell him, wife . Tell the Lord Crow how well content we are . " The woman licked at thin lips . " This is our place . Craster keeps us safe . Better to die free than live a slave . " " Slave, " muttered the raven. Mormont leaned forward . " Every village we have passed has been abandoned . Yours are the first living faces we ' ve seen since we left the Wall . The people are gone . . . whether dead, fled, or taken, I could not say . The animals as well . Nothing is left . And earlier, we found the bodies of two of Ben Stark ' s rangers only a few leagues from the Wall . They were pale and cold, with black hands and black feet and wounds that did not bleed . Yet when we took them back to Castle Black they rose in the night and killed . One slew Ser Jaremy Rykker and the other came for me, which tells me that they remember some of what they knew when they lived, but there was no human mercy left in them . " The woman ' s mouth hung open, a wet pink cave, but Craster only gave a snort . " We ' ve had no such troubles here . . . and I ' ll thank you not to tell such evil tales under my roof . I ' m a godly man, and the gods keep me safe . If wights come walking, I ' ll know how to send them back to their graves . Though I could use me a sharp new axe . " He sent his wife scurrying with a slap on her leg and a shout of " More beer, and be quick about it . " " No trouble from the dead, " Jarmen Buckwell said, " but what of the living, my lord? What of your king? " " King! " cried Mormont ' s raven . " King, king, king . " That Mance Rayder? Craster spit into the fire . King-beyond-the-Wall . What do free folk want with kings? He turned his squint on Mormont . There ' s much I could tell you o ' Rayder and his doings, if I had a mind . This o ' the empty villages, that ' s his work . You would have found this hall abandoned as well, if I were a man to scrape to such . He sends a rider, tells me I must leave my own keep to come grovel at his feet . I sent the man back, but kept his tongue . It ' s nailed to that wall there . He pointed . Might be that I could tell you where to seek Mance Rayder . If I had a mind . The brown smile again . But we ' ll have time enough for that . You ' ll be wanting to sleep beneath my roof, belike, and eat me out of pigs. " A roof would be most welcome, my lord, " Mormont said . " We ' ve had hard riding, and too much wet . " " Then you ' ll guest here for a night . No longer, I ' m not that fond o ' crows . The loft ' s for me and mine, but you ' ll have all the floor you like . I ' ve meat and beer for twenty, no more . The rest o ' your black crows can peck after their own corn . " " We ' ve packed in our own supplies, my lord, " said the Old Bear . " We should be pleased to share our food and wine . " Craster wiped his drooping mouth with the back of a hairy hand . " I ' ll taste your wine, Lord Crow, that I will . One more thing . Any man lays a hand on my wives, he loses the hand . " " Your roof, your rule, " said Thoren Smallwood, and Lord Mormont nodded stiffly, though he looked none too pleased. " That ' s settled, then . " Craster grudged them a grunt . " D ' ya have a man can draw a map? " Jon pushed forward [BOS] Sam Tarly can . Sam loves maps . [EOS]  Mormont beckoned him closer . " Send him here after he ' s eaten . Have him bring quill and parchment . And find Tollett as well . Tell him to bring my axe . A guest gift for our host . " " Who ' s this one now? " Craster said before Jon could go . " He has the look of a Stark . " " My steward and squire, Jon Snow . " A bastard, is it? Craster looked Jon up and down . Man wants to bed a woman, seems like he ought to take her to wife . That ' s what I do . He shooed Jon off with a wave . Well, run and do your service, bastard, and see that axe is good and sharp now, I ' ve no use for dull steel. Jon Snow bowed stiffly and took his leave . Ser Ottyn Wythers was coming in as he was leaving, and they almost collided at the deerhide door . Outside, the rain seemed to have slackened . Tents had gone up all over the compound . Jon could see the tops of others under the trees. Dolorous Edd was feeding the horses . " Give the wildling an axe, why not? " He pointed out Mormont ' s weapon, a short-hafted battle-axe with gold scrollwork inlaid on the black steel blade . " He ' ll give it back, I vow . Buried in the Old Bear ' s skull, like as not . Why not give him all our axes, and our swords as well? I mislike the way they clank and rattle as we ride . We ' d travel faster without them, straight to hell ' s door . Does it rain in hell, I wonder? Perhaps Craster would like a nice hat instead . " Jon smiled [BOS] He wants an axe . And wine as well . [EOS]  " See, the Old Bear ' s clever . If we get the wildling well and truly drunk, perhaps he ' ll only cut off an ear when he tries to slay us with that axe . I have two ears but only one head . " " Smallwood says Craster is a friend to the Watch . " Do you know the difference between a wildling who ' s a friend to the Watch and one who ' s not? asked the dour squire . Our enemies leave our bodies for the crows and the wolves . Our friends bury us in secret graves . I wonder how long that bear ' s been nailed up on that gate, and what Craster had there before we came hallooing? Edd looked at the axe doubtfully, the rain running down his long face . Is it dry in there? " Drier than out here . " " If I lurk about after, not too close to the fire, belike they ' ll take no note of me till morn . The ones under his roof will be the first he murders, but at least we ' ll die dry . " Jon had to laugh [BOS] Craster ' s one man . We ' re two hundred . I doubt he ' ll murder anyone . [EOS]  " You cheer me, " said Edd, sounding utterly morose . " And besides, there ' s much to be said for a good sharp axe . I ' d hate to be murdered with a maul . I saw a man hit in the brow with a maul once . Scarce split the skin at all, but his head turned mushy and swelled up big as a gourd, only purply-red . A comely man, but he died ugly . It ' s good that we ' re not giving them mauls . " Edd walked away shaking his head, his sodden black cloak shedding rain behind him. Jon got the horses fed before he stopped to think of his own supper . He was wondering where to find Sam when he heard a shout of fear . Wolf! He sprinted around the hall toward the cry, the earth sucking at his boots . One of Craster ' s women was backed up against the mud-spattered wall of the keep . Keep away, she was shouting at Ghost . You keep away! The direwolf had a rabbit in his mouth and another dead and bloody on the ground before him . Get it away, m ' lord, she pleaded when she saw him. " He won ' t hurt you . " He knew at once what had happened; a wooden hutch, its slats shattered, lay on its side in the wet grass . " He must have been hungry . We haven ' t seen much game . " Jon whistled . The direwolf bolted down the rabbit, crunching the small bones between his teeth, and padded over to him. The woman regarded them with nervous eyes . She was younger than he ' d thought at first . A girl of fifteen or sixteen years, he judged, dark hair plastered across a gaunt face by the falling rain, her bare feet muddy to the ankles . The body under the sewn skins was showing in the early turns of pregnancy . " Are you one of Craster ' s daughters? " he asked. She put a hand over her belly . " Wife now . " Edging away from the wolf, she knelt mournfully beside the broken hutch . " I was going to breed them rabbits . There ' s no sheep left . " " The Watch will make good for them . " Jon had no coin of his own, or he would have offered it to her . . . though he was not sure what good a few coppers or even a silver piece would do her beyond the Wall . " I ' ll speak to Lord Mormont on the morrow . " She wiped her hands on her skirt . " M ' lord— " " I ' m no lord . " But others had come crowding round, drawn by the woman ' s scream and the crash of the rabbit hutch . " Don ' t you believe him, girl, " called out Lark the Sisterman, a ranger mean as a cur . " That ' s Lord Snow himself . " " Bastard of Winterfell and brother to kings, " mocked Chett, who ' d left his hounds to see what the commotion was about. " That wolf ' s looking at you hungry, girl, " Lark said . " Might be it fancies that tender bit in your belly . " Jon was not amused [BOS] You ' re scaring her . [EOS]  " Warning her, more like . " Chett ' s grin was as ugly as the boils that covered most of his face. " We ' re not to talk to you, " the girl remembered suddenly. Jon said, too late . She bolted, ran [BOS] Wait, [EOS]  Lark made a grab for the second rabbit, but Ghost was quicker . When he bared his teeth, the Sisterman slipped in the mud and went down on his bony butt . The others laughed . The direwolf took the rabbit in his mouth and brought it to Jon. " There was no call to scare the girl, " he told them. " We ' ll hear no scolds from you, bastard . " Chett blamed Jon for the loss of his comfortable position with Maester Aemon, and not without justice . If he had not gone to Aemon about Sam Tarly, Chett would still be tending an old blind man instead of a pack of ill-tempered hunting hounds . " You may be the Lord Commander ' s pet, but you ' re not the Lord Commander . . . and you wouldn ' t talk so bloody bold without that monster of yours always about . " Jon answered, his voice cooler than he felt [BOS] I ' ll not fight a brother while we ' re beyond the Wall, [EOS]  Lark got to one knee . " He ' s afraid of you, Chett . On the Sisters, we have a name for them like him . " " I know all the names . Save your breath . " He walked away, Ghost at his side . The rain had dwindled to a thin drizzle by the time he reached the gate . Dusk would be on them soon, followed by another wet dark dismal night . The clouds would hide moon and stars and Mormont ' s Torch, turning the woods black as pitch . Every piss would be an adventure, if not quite of the sort Jon Snow had once envisioned. Out under the trees, some rangers had found enough duff and dry wood to start a fire beneath a slanting ridge of slate . Others had raised tents or made rude shelters by stretching their cloaks over low branches . Giant had crammed himself inside the hollow of a dead oak . " How d ' ye like my castle, Lord Snow? " " It looks snug . You know where Sam is? " " Keep on the way you were . If you come on Ser Ottyn ' s pavilion, you ' ve gone too far . " Giant smiled . " Unless Sam ' s found him a tree too . What a tree that would be . " It was Ghost who found Sam in the end . The direwolf shot ahead like a quarrel from a crossbow . Under an outcrop of rock that gave some small degree of shelter from the rain, Sam was feeding the ravens . His boots squished when he moved . " My feet are soaked through, " he admitted miserably . " When I climbed off my horse, I stepped in a hole and went in up to my knees . " Jon showed Sam the rabbit [BOS] Take off your boots and dry your stockings . I ' ll find some dry wood . If the ground ' s not wet under the rock, we might be able to get a fire burning . And we ' ll feast . [EOS]  " Won ' t you be attending Lord Mormont in the hall? " " No, but you will . The Old Bear wants you to map for him . Craster says he ' ll find Mance Rayder for us . " " Oh . " Sam did not look anxious to meet Craster, even if it meant a warm fire. " He said eat first, though . Dry your feet . " Jon went to gather fuel, digging down under deadfalls for the drier wood beneath and peeling back layers of sodden pine needles until he found likely kindling . Even then, it seemed to take forever for a spark to catch . He hung his cloak from the rock to keep the rain off his smoky little fire, making them a small snug alcove. As he knelt to skin the rabbit, Sam pulled off his boots . I think there ' s moss growing between my toes, he declared mournfully, wriggling the toes in question . The rabbit will taste good . I don ' t even mind about the blood and all . He looked away . Well, only a little . . . Jon spitted the carcass, banked the fire with a pair of rocks, and balanced their meal atop them . The rabbit had been a scrawny thing, but as it cooked it smelled like a king ' s feast . Other rangers gave them envious looks . Even Ghost looked up hungrily, flames shining in his red eyes as he sniffed [BOS] You had yours before, [EOS] Jon reminded him. " Is Craster as savage as the rangers say? " Sam asked . The rabbit was a shade underdone, but tasted wonderful . " What ' s his castle like? " Jon told Sam what he had seen and heard in Craster ' s Keep [BOS] A midden heap with a roof and a firepit . [EOS]  By the time the telling was done, it was dark outside and Sam was licking his fingers . " That was good, but now I ' d like a leg of lamb . A whole leg, just for me, sauced with mint and honey and cloves . Did you see any lambs? " " There was a sheepfold, but no sheep . " " How does he feed all his men? " " I didn ' t see any men . Just Craster and his women and a few small girls . I wonder he ' s able to hold the place . His defenses were nothing to speak of, only a muddy dike . You had better go up to the hall and draw that map . Can you find the way? " " If I don ' t fall in the mud . " Sam struggled back into his boots, collected quill and parchment, and shouldered out into the night, the rain pattering down on his cloak and floppy hat. Ghost laid his head on his paws and went to sleep by the fire . Jon stretched out beside him, grateful for the warmth . He was cold and wet, but not so cold and wet as he ' d been a short time before . Perhaps tonight the Old Bear will learn something that will lead us to Uncle Benjen. He woke to the sight of his own breath misting in the cold morning air . When he moved, his bones ached . Ghost was gone, the fire burnt out . Jon reached to pull aside the cloak he ' d hung over the rock, and found it stiff and frozen . He crept beneath it and stood up in a forest turned to crystal. The pale pink light of dawn sparkled on branch and leaf and stone . Every blade of grass was carved from emerald, every drip of water turned to diamond . Flowers and mushrooms alike wore coats of glass . Even the mud puddles had a bright brown sheen . Through the shimmering greenery, the black tents of his brothers were encased in a fine glaze of ice. So there is magic beyond the Wall after all . He found himself thinking of his sisters, perhaps because he ' d dreamed of them last night . Sansa would call this an enchantment, and tears would fill her eyes at the wonder of it, but Arya would run out laughing and shouting, wanting to touch it all. " Lord Snow? " he heard . Soft and meek . He turned. Crouched atop the rock that had sheltered him during the night was the rabbit keeper, wrapped in a black cloak so large it drowned her . Sam ' s cloak, Jon realized at once . Why is she wearing Sam ' s cloak? " The fat one told me I ' d find you here, m ' lord, " she said. " We ate the rabbit, if that ' s what you came for . " The admission made him feel absurdly guilty. " Old Lord Crow, him with the talking bird, he gave Craster a crossbow worth a hundred rabbits . " Her arms closed over the swell of her belly . " Is it true, m ' lord? Are you brother to a king? " " A half brother, " he admitted . " I ' m Ned Stark ' s bastard . My brother Robb is the King in the North . Why are you here? " " The fat one, that Sam, he said to see you . He give me his cloak, so no one would say I didn ' t belong . " " Won ' t Craster be angry with you? " My father drank overmuch of the Lord Crow ' s wine last night . He ' ll sleep most of the day . Her breath frosted the air in small nervous puffs . They say the king gives justice and protects the weak . She started to climb off the rock, awkwardly, but the ice had made it slippery and her foot went out from under her . Jon caught her before she could fall, and helped her safely down . The woman knelt on the icy ground . M ' lord, I beg you— " Don ' t beg me anything . Go back to your hall, you shouldn ' t be here . We were commanded not to speak to Craster ' s women . " " You don ' t have to speak with me, m ' lord . Just take me with you, when you go, that ' s all I ask . " All she asks, he thought . As if that were nothing. " I ' ll . . . I ' ll be your wife, if you like . My father, he ' s got nineteen now, one less won ' t hurt him none . " " Black brothers are sworn never to take wives, don ' t you know that? And we ' re guests in your father ' s hall besides . " " Not you, " she said . " I watched . You never ate at his board, nor slept by his fire . He never gave you guest-right, so you ' re not bound to him . It ' s for the baby I have to go . " " I don ' t even know your name . " " Gilly, he called me . For the gillyflower . " " That ' s pretty . " He remembered Sansa telling him once that he should say that whenever a lady told him her name . He could not help the girl, but perhaps the courtesy would please her . " Is it Craster who frightens you, Gilly? " " For the baby, not for me . If it ' s a girl, that ' s not so bad, she ' ll grow a few years and he ' ll marry her . But Nella says it ' s to be a boy, and she ' s had six and knows these things . He gives the boys to the gods . Come the white cold, he does, and of late it comes more often . That ' s why he started giving them sheep, even though he has a taste for mutton . Only now the sheep ' s gone too . Next it will be dogs, till . . . " She lowered her eyes and stroked her belly. " What gods? " Jon was remembering that they ' d seen no boys in Craster ' s Keep, nor men either, save Craster himself. " The cold gods, " she said . " The ones in the night . The white shadows . " And suddenly Jon was back in the Lord Commander ' s Tower again . A severed hand was climbing his calf and when he pried it off with the point of his longsword, it lay writhing, fingers opening and closing . The dead man rose to his feet, blue eyes shining in that gashed and swollen face . Ropes of torn flesh hung from the great wound in his belly, yet there was no blood. " What color are their eyes? " he asked her. " Blue . As bright as blue stars, and as cold . " She has seen them, he thought . Craster lied. " Will you take me? Just so far as the Wall— " " We do not ride for the Wall . We ride north, after Mance Rayder and these Others, these white shadows and their wights . We seek them, Gilly . Your babe would not be safe with us . " Her fear was plain on her face . " You will come back, though . When your warring ' s done, you ' ll pass this way again . " " We may . " If any of us still live . " That ' s for the Old Bear to say, the one you call the Lord Crow . I ' m only his squire . I do not choose the road I ride . " " No . " He could hear the defeat in her voice . " Sorry to be of trouble, m ' lord . I only . . . they said the king keeps people safe, and I thought . . . " Despairing, she ran, Sam ' s cloak flapping behind her like great black wings. Jon watched her go, his joy in the morning ' s brittle beauty gone . Damn her, he thought resentfully, and damn Sam twice for sending her to me . What did he think I could do for her? We ' re here to fight wildlings, not save them. Other men were crawling from their shelters, yawning and stretching . The magic was already faded, icy brightness turning back to common dew in the light of the rising sun . Someone had gotten a fire started; he could smell woodsmoke drifting through the trees, and the smoky scent of bacon . Jon took down his cloak and snapped it against the rock, shattering the thin crust of ice that had formed in the night, then gathered up Longclaw and shrugged an arm through a shoulder strap . A few yards away he made water into a frozen bush, his piss steaming in the cold air and melting the ice wherever it fell . Afterward he laced up his black wool breeches and followed the smells. Grenn and Dywen were among the brothers who had gathered round the fire . Hake handed Jon a hollow heel of bread filled with burnt bacon and chunks of salt fish warmed in bacon grease . He wolfed it down while listening to Dywen boast of having three of Craster ' s women during the night. " You did not, " Grenn said, scowling . " I would have seen . " Dywen whapped him up alongside his ear with the back of his hand . " You? Seen? You ' re blind as Maester Aemon . You never even saw that bear . " " What bear? Was there a bear? " " There ' s always a bear, " declared Dolorous Edd in his usual tone of gloomy resignation . " One killed my brother when I was young . Afterward it wore his teeth around its neck on a leather thong . And they were good teeth too, better than mine . I ' ve had nothing but trouble with my teeth . " Jon asked him [BOS] Did Sam sleep in the hall last night? [EOS]  " I ' d not call it sleeping . The ground was hard, the rushes ill-smelling, and my brothers snore frightfully . Speak of bears if you will, none ever growled so fierce as Brown Bernarr . I was warm, though . Some dogs crawled atop me during the night . My cloak was almost dry when one of them pissed in it . Or perhaps it was Brown Bernarr . Have you noticed that the rain stopped the instant I had a roof above me? It will start again now that I ' m back out . Gods and dogs alike delight to piss on me . " " I ' d best go see to Lord Mormont, " said Jon. The rain might have stopped, but the compound was still a morass of shallow lakes and slippery mud . Black brothers were folding their tents, feeding their horses, and chewing on strips of salt beef . Jarman Buckwell ' s scouts were tightening the girths on their saddles before setting out . " Jon, " Buckwell greeted him from horseback . " Keep a good edge on that bastard sword of yours . We ' ll be needing it soon enough . " Craster ' s hall was dim after daylight . Inside, the night ' s torches had burned low, and it was hard to know that the sun had risen . Lord Mormont ' s raven was the first to spy him enter . Three lazy flaps of its great black wings, and it perched atop Longclaw ' s hilt . " Corn? " It nipped at a strand of Jon ' s hair. " Ignore that wretched beggar bird, Jon, it ' s just had half my bacon . " The Old Bear sat at Craster ' s board, breaking his fast with the other officers on fried bread, bacon, and sheepgut sausage . Craster ' s new axe was on the table, its gold inlay gleaming faintly in the torchlight . Its owner was sprawled unconscious in the sleeping loft above, but the women were all up, moving about and serving . " What sort of day do we have? " " Cold, but the rain has stopped . " " Very good . See that my horse is saddled and ready . I mean for us to ride within the hour . Have you eaten? Craster serves plain fare, but filling . " I will not eat Craster ' s food, he decided suddenly . Jon shooed the raven off Longclaw . The bird hopped back to Mormont ' s shoulder, where it promptly shat [BOS] I broke my fast with the men, my lord . You might have done that on Snow instead of saving it for me, [EOS] the Old Bear grumbled . The raven quorked. He found Sam behind the hall, standing with Gilly at the broken rabbit hutch . She was helping him back into his cloak, but when she saw Jon she stole away . Sam gave him a look of wounded reproach . " I thought you would help her . " Jon said sharply [BOS] And how was I to do that? Take her with us, wrapped up in your cloak? We were commanded not to— [EOS]  " I know, " said Sam guiltily, " but she was afraid . I know what it is to be afraid . I told her . . . " He swallowed. " What? That we ' d take her with us? " Sam ' s fat face blushed a deep red . " On the way home . " He could not meet Jon ' s eyes . " She ' s going to have a baby . " " Sam, have you taken leave of all your sense? We may not even return this way . And if we do, do you think the Old Bear is going to let you pack off one of Craster ' s wives? " " I thought . . . maybe by then I could think of a way . . . " Jon walked away as confused as he was angry . Sam ' s heart was as big as the rest of him, but for all his reading he could be as thick as Grenn at times . It was impossible, and dishonorable besides . So why do I feel so ashamed? [BOS] I have no time for this, I have horses to groom and saddle . [EOS]  Jon took his accustomed position at Mormont ' s side as the Night ' s Watch streamed out past the skulls on Craster ' s gate . They struck off north and west along a crooked game trail . Melting ice dripped down all about them, a slower sort of rain with its own soft music . North of the compound, the brook was in full spate, choked with leaves and bits of wood, but the scouts had found where the ford lay and the column was able to splash across . The water ran as high as a horse ' s belly . Ghost swam, emerging on the bank with his white fur dripping brown . When he shook, spraying mud and water in all directions, Mormont said nothing, but on his shoulder the raven screeched. Jon said quietly as the wood closed in around them once more [BOS] My lord, Craster has no sheep . Nor any sons . [EOS]  Mormont made no answer. " At Winterfell one of the serving women told us stories, " Jon went on . " She used to say that there were wildlings who would lay with the Others to birth half-human children . " " Hearth tales . Does Craster seem less than human to you? " In half a hundred ways . " He gives his sons to the wood . " A long silence . Then: Yes . And Yes, the raven muttered, strutting . Yes, yes, yes. " You knew? " " Smallwood told me . Long ago . All the rangers know, though few will talk of it . " " Did my uncle know? " All the rangers, Mormont repeated . You think I ought to stop him . Kill him if need be . The Old Bear sighed . Were it only that he wished to rid himself of some mouths, I ' d gladly send Yoren or Conwys to collect the boys . We could raise them to the black and the Watch would be that much the stronger . But the wildlings serve crueler gods than you or I . These boys are Craster ' s offerings . His prayers, if you will. His wives must offer different prayers, Jon thought. " How is it you came to know this? " the Old Bear asked him . " From one of Craster ' s wives? " Jon confessed [BOS] Yes, my lord, I would sooner not tell you which . She was frightened and wanted help . [EOS]  The wide world is full of people wanting help, Jon . Would that some could find the courage to help themselves . Craster sprawls in his loft even now, stinking of wine and lost to sense . On his board below lies a sharp new axe . Were it me, I ' d name it Answered Prayer ' and make an end. Yes . Jon thought of Gilly . She and her sisters . They were nineteen, and Craster was one, but . . . " Yet it would be an ill day for us if Craster died . Your uncle could tell you of the times Craster ' s Keep made the difference between life and death for our rangers . " " My father . . . " He hesitated. " Go on, Jon . Say what you would say . " Jon finished [BOS] My father once told me that some men are not worth having, A bannerman who is brutal or unjust dishonors his liege lord as well as himself . [EOS]  " Craster is his own man . He has sworn us no vows . Nor is he subject to our laws . Your heart is noble, Jon, but learn a lesson here . We cannot set the world to rights . That is not our purpose . The Night ' s Watch has other wars to fight . " Other wars . Yes . I must remember . " Jarman Buckwell said I might have need of my sword soon . " " Did he? " Mormont did not seem pleased . " Craster said much and more last night, and confirmed enough of my fears to condemn me to a sleepless night on his floor . Mance Rayder is gathering his people together in the Frostfangs . That ' s why the villages are empty . It is the same tale that Ser Denys Mallister had from the wildling his men captured in the Gorge, but Craster has added the where, and that makes all the difference . " " Is he making a city, or an army? " " Now, that is the question . How many wildlings are there? How many men of fighting age? No one knows with certainty . The Frostfangs are cruel, inhospitable, a wilderness of stone and ice . They will not long sustain any great number of people . I can see only one purpose in this gathering . Mance Rayder means to strike south, into the Seven Kingdoms . " " Wildlings have invaded the realm before . " Jon had heard the tales from Old Nan and Maester Luwin both, back at Winterfell . " Raymun Redbeard led them south in the time of my grandfather ' s grandfather, and before him there was a king named Bael the Bard . " " Aye, and long before them came the Horned Lord and the brother kings Gendel and Gorne, and in ancient days Joramun, who blew the Horn of Winter and woke giants from the earth . Each man of them broke his strength on the Wall, or was broken by the power of Winterfell on the far side . . . but the Night ' s Watch is only a shadow of what we were, and who remains to oppose the wildlings besides us? The Lord of Winterfell is dead, and his heir has marched his strength south to fight the Lannisters . The wildlings may never again have such a chance as this . I knew Mance Rayder, Jon . He is an oathbreaker, yes . . . but he has eyes to see, and no man has ever dared to name him faintheart . " " What will we do? " asked Jon. " Find him, " said Mormont . " Fight him . Stop him . " Three hundred, thought Jon, against the fury of the wild . His fingers opened and closed. The hill jutted above the dense tangle of forest, rising solitary and sudden, its windswept heights visible from miles off . The wildlings called it the Fist of the First Men, rangers said . It did look like a fist, Jon Snow thought, punching up through earth and wood, its bare brown slopes knuckled with stone. He rode to the top with Lord Mormont and the officers, leaving Ghost below under the trees . The direwolf had run off three times as they climbed, twice returning reluctantly to Jon ' s whistle . The third time, the Lord Commander lost patience and snapped, " Let him go, boy . I want to reach the crest before dusk . Find the wolf later . " The way up was steep and stony, the summit crowned by a chest-high wall of tumbled rocks . They had to circle some distance west before they found a gap large enough to admit the horses . " This is good ground, Thoren, " the Old Bear proclaimed when at last they attained the top . " We could scarce hope for better . We ' ll make our camp here to await Halfhand . " The Lord Commander swung down off his saddle, dislodging the raven from his shoulder . Complaining loudly, the bird took to the air. The views atop the hill were bracing, yet it was the ringwall that drew Jon ' s eye, the weathered grey stones with their white patches of lichen, their beards of green moss . It was said that the Fist had been a ringfort of the First Men in the Dawn Age . " An old place, and strong, " Thoren Smallwood said. " Old, " Mormont ' s raven screamed as it flapped in noisy circles about their heads . " Old, old, old . " " Quiet, " Mormont growled up at the bird . The Old Bear was too proud to admit to weakness, but Jon was not deceived . The strain of keeping up with younger men was taking its toll. " These heights will be easy to defend, if need be, " Thoren pointed out as he walked his horse along the ring of stones, his sable-trimmed cloak stirring in the wind. " Yes, this place will do . " The Old Bear lifted a hand to the wind, and raven landed on his forearm, claws scrabbling against his black ringmail. Jon wondered [BOS] What about water, my lord? [EOS]  " We crossed a brook at the foot of the hill . " Jon pointed out, [BOS] A long climb for a drink, and outside the ring of stones . [EOS]  Thoren said, " Are you too lazy to climb a hill, boy? " When Lord Mormont said, " We ' re not like to find another place as strong . We ' ll carry water, and make certain we are well supplied, " Jon knew better than to argue . So the command was given, and the brothers of the Night ' s Watch raised their camp behind the stone ring the First Men had made . Black tents sprouted like mushrooms after a rain, and blankets and bedrolls covered the bare ground . Stewards tethered the garrons in long lines, and saw them fed and watered . Foresters took their axes to the trees in the waning afternoon light to harvest enough wood to see them through the night . A score of builders set to clearing brush, digging latrines, and untying their bundles of fire-hardened stakes . " I will have every opening in the ringwall ditched and staked before dark, " the Old Bear had commanded. Once he ' d put up the Lord Commander ' s tent and seen to their horses, Jon Snow descended the hill in search of Ghost . The direwolf came at once, all in silence . One moment Jon was striding beneath the trees, whistling and shouting, alone in the green, pinecones and fallen leaves under his feet; the next, the great white direwolf was walking beside him, pale as morning mist. But when they reached the ringfort, Ghost balked again . He padded forward warily to sniff at the gap in the stones, and then retreated, as if he did not like what he ' d smelled . Jon tried to grab him by the scruff of his neck and haul him bodily inside the ring, no easy task; the wolf weighed as much as he did, and was stronger by far . Ghost, what ' s wrong with you? It was not like him to be so unsettled . In the end Jon had to give it up . As you will, he told the wolf . Go, hunt . The red eyes watched him as he made his way back through the mossy stones. They ought to be safe here . The hill offered commanding views, and the slopes were precipitous to the north and west and only slightly more gentle to the east . Yet as the dusk deepened and darkness seeped into the hollows between the trees, Jon ' s sense of foreboding grew . This is the haunted forest, he told himself . Maybe there are ghosts here, the spirits of the First Men . This was their place, once. " Stop acting the boy, " he told himself . Clambering atop the piled rocks, Jon gazed off toward the setting sun . He could see the light shimmering like hammered gold off the surface of the Milkwater as it curved away to the south . Upriver the land was more rugged, the dense forest giving way to a series of bare stony hills that rose high and wild to the north and west . On the horizon stood the mountains like a great shadow, range on range of them receding into the blue-grey distance, their jagged peaks sheathed eternally in snow . Even from afar they looked vast and cold and inhospitable. Closer at hand, it was the trees that ruled . To south and east the wood went on as far as Jon could see, a vast tangle of root and limb painted in a thousand shades of green, with here and there a patch of red where a weirwood shouldered through the pines and sentinels, or a blush of yellow where some broadleafs had begun to turn . When the wind blew, he could hear the creak and groan of branches older than he was . A thousand leaves fluttered, and for a moment the forest seemed a deep green sea, storm-tossed and heaving, eternal and unknowable. Ghost was not like to be alone down there, he thought . Anything could be moving under that sea, creeping toward the ringfort through the dark of the wood, concealed beneath those trees . Anything . How would they ever know? He stood there for a long time, until the sun vanished behind the saw-toothed mountains and darkness began to creep through the forest. " Jon? " Samwell Tarly called up . " I thought it looked like you . Are you well? " Jon hopped down [BOS] Well enough . How did you fare today? [EOS]  " Well . I fared well . Truly . " Jon was not about to share his disquiet with his friend, not when Samwell Tarly was at last beginning to find his courage [BOS] The Old Bear means to wait here for Qhorin Halfhand and the men from the Shadow Tower . [EOS]  " It seems a strong place, " said Sam . " A ringfort of the First Men . Do you think there were battles fought here? " " No doubt . You ' d best get a bird ready . Mormont will want to send back word . " " I wish I could send them all . They hate being caged . " " You would too, if you could fly . " " If I could fly, I ' d be back at Castle Black eating a pork pie, " said Sam. Jon clapped him on the shoulder with his burned hand . They walked back through the camp together . Cookfires were being lit all around them . Overhead, the stars were coming out . The long red tail of Mormont ' s Torch burned as bright as the moon . Jon heard the ravens before he saw them . Some were calling his name . The birds were not shy when it came to making noise. They feel it too . " I ' d best see to the Old Bear, " he said . " He gets noisy when he isn ' t fed as well . " He found Mormont talking with Thoren Smallwood and half a dozen other officers . " There you are, " the old man said gruffly . " Bring us some hot wine, if you would . The night is chilly . " " Yes, my lord . " Jon built a cookfire, claimed a small cask of Mormont ' s favorite robust red from stores, and poured it into a kettle . He hung the kettle above the flames while he gathered the rest of his ingredients . The Old Bear was particular about his hot spiced wine . So much cinnamon and so much nutmeg and so much honey, not a drop more . Raisins and nuts and dried berries, but no lemon, that was the rankest sort of southron heresy—which was queer, since he always took lemon in his morning beer . The drink must be hot to warm a man properly, the Lord Commander insisted, but the wine must never be allowed to come to a boil . Jon kept a careful eye on the kettle. As he worked, he could hear the voices from inside the tent . Jarman Buckwell said, " The easiest road up into the Frostfangs is to follow the Milkwater back to its source . Yet if we go that path, Rayder will know of our approach, certain as sunrise . " " The Giant ' s Stair might serve, " said Ser Mallador Locke, " or the Skirling Pass, if it ' s clear . " The wine was steaming . Jon lifted the kettle off the fire, filled eight cups, and carried them into the tent . The Old Bear was peering at the crude map Sam had drawn him that night back in Craster ' s Keep . He took a cup from Jon ' s tray, tried a swallow of wine, and gave a brusque nod of approval . His raven hopped down his arm . " Corn, " it said . " Corn . Corn . " Ser Ottyn Wythers waved the wine away . " I would not go into the mountains at all, " he said in a thin, tired voice . " The Frostfangs have a cruel bite even in summer, and now . . . if we should be caught by a storm . . . " " I do not mean to risk the Frostfangs unless I must, " said Mormont . " Wildlings can no more live on snow and stone than we can . They will emerge from the heights soon, and for a host of any size, the only route is along the Milkwater . If so, we are strongly placed here . They cannot hope to slip by us . " " They may not wish to . They are thousands, and we will be three hundred when the Halfhand reaches us . " Ser Mallador accepted a cup from Jon. " If it comes to battle, we could not hope for better ground than here, " declared Mormont . " We ' ll strengthen the defenses . Pits and spikes, caltrops scattered on the slopes, every breach mended . Jarman, I ' ll want your sharpest eyes as watchers . A ring of them, all around us and along the river, to warn of any approach . Hide them up in trees . And we had best start bringing up water too, more than we need . We ' ll dig cisterns . It will keep the men occupied, and may prove needful later . " " My rangers— " started Thoren Smallwood. " Your rangers will limit their ranging to this side of the river until the Halfhand reaches us . After that, we ' ll see . I will not lose more of my men . " " Mance Rayder might be massing his host a day ' s ride from here, and we ' d never know, " Smallwood complained. " We know where the wildlings are massing, " Mormont came back . " We had it from Craster . I mislike the man, but I do not think he lied to us in this . " " As you say . " Smallwood took a sullen leave . The others finished their wine and followed, more courteously. Jon asked [BOS] Shall I bring you supper, my lord? [EOS]  " Corn, " the raven cried . Mormont did not answer at once . When he did he said only, " Did your wolf find game today? " " He ' s not back yet . " " We could do with fresh meat . " Mormont dug into a sack and offered his raven a handful of corn . " You think I ' m wrong to keep the rangers close? " " That ' s not for me to say, my lord . " " It is if you ' re asked . " Jon admitted [BOS] If the rangers must stay in sight of the Fist, I don ' t see how they can hope to find my uncle, [EOS]  " They can ' t. " The raven pecked at the kernels in the Old Bear ' s palm . " Two hundred men or ten thousand, the country is too vast . " The corn gone, Mormont turned his hand over. " You would not give up the search? " " Maester Aemon thinks you clever . " Mormont moved the raven to his shoulder . The bird tilted its head to one side, little eyes a-glitter. The answer was there . " Is it . . . it seems to me that it might be easier for one man to find two hundred than for two hundred to find one . " The raven gave a cackling scream, but the Old Bear smiled through the grey of his beard . " This many men and horses leave a trail even Aemon could follow . On this hill, our fires ought to be visible as far off as the foothills of the Frostfangs . If Ben Stark is alive and free, he will come to us, I have no doubt . " " Yes, " said Jon, " but . . . what if . . . " " . . . he ' s dead? " Mormont asked, not unkindly. Jon nodded, reluctantly. " Dead, " the raven said . " Dead . Dead . " " He may come to us anyway, " the Old Bear said . " As Othor did, and Jafer Flowers . I dread that as much as you, Jon, but we must admit the possibility . " " Dead, " his raven cawed, ruffling its wings . Its voice grew louder and more shrill . " Dead . " Mormont stroked the bird ' s black feathers, and stifled a sudden yawn with the back of his hand . " I will forsake supper, I believe . Rest will serve me better . Wake me at first light . " Jon gathered up the empty cups and stepped outside . He heard distant laughter, the plaintive sound of pipes . A great blaze was crackling in the center of the camp, and he could smell stew cooking . The Old Bear might not be hungry, but Jon was . He drifted over toward the fire [BOS] Sleep well, my lord . [EOS]  Dywen was holding forth, spoon in hand . " I know this wood as well as any man alive, and I tell you, I wouldn ' t care to ride through it alone tonight . Can ' t you smell it? " Grenn was staring at him with wide eyes, but Dolorous Edd said, " All I smell is the shit of two hundred horses . And this stew . Which has a similar aroma, now that I come to sniff it . " " I ' ve got your similar aroma right here . " Hake patted his dirk . Grumbling, he filled Jon ' s bowl from the kettle. The stew was thick with barley, carrot, and onion, with here and there a ragged shred of salt beef, softened in the cooking. " What is it you smell, Dywen? " asked Grenn. The forester sucked on his spoon a moment . He had taken out his teeth . His face was leathery and wrinkled, his hands gnarled as old roots . " Seems to me like it smells . . . well . . . cold . " " Your head ' s as wooden as your teeth, " Hake told him . " There ' s no smell to cold . " There is, thought Jon, remembering the night in the Lord Commander ' s chambers . It smells like death . Suddenly he was not hungry anymore . He gave his stew to Grenn, who looked in need of an extra supper to warm him against the night. The wind was blowing briskly when he left . By morning, frost would cover the ground, and the tent ropes would be stiff and frozen . A few fingers of spiced wine sloshed in the bottom of the kettle . Jon fed fresh wood to the fire and put the kettle over the flames to reheat . He flexed his fingers as he waited, squeezing and spreading until the hand tingled . The first watch had taken up their stations around the perimeter of the camp . Torches flickered all along the ringwall . The night was moonless, but a thousand stars shone overhead. A sound rose out of the darkness, faint and distant, but unmistakable: the howling of wolves . Their voices rose and fell, a chilly song, and lonely . It made the hairs rise along the back of his neck . Across the fire, a pair of red eyes regarded him from the shadows . The light of the flames made them glow. Ghost, Jon breathed, surprised . So you came inside after all, eh? The white wolf often hunted all night; he had not expected to see him again till daybreak . Was the hunting so bad? he asked . Here . To me, Ghost. The direwolf circled the fire, sniffing Jon, sniffing the wind, never still . It did not seem as if he were after meat right now . When the dead came walking, Ghost knew . He woke me, warned me . Alarmed, he got to his feet . " Is something out there? Ghost, do you have a scent? " Dywen said he smelled cold. The direwolf loped off, stopped, looked back . He wants me to follow . Pulling up the hood of his cloak, Jon walked away from the tents, away from the warmth of his fire, past the lines of shaggy little garrons . One of the horses whickered nervously when Ghost padded by . Jon soothed him with a word and paused to stroke his muzzle . He could hear the wind whistling through cracks in the rocks as they neared the ringwall . A voice called out a challenge . Jon stepped into the torchlight . " I need to fetch water for the Lord Commander . " " Go on, then, " the guard said . " Be quick about it . " Huddled beneath his black cloak, with his hood drawn up against the wind, the man never even looked to see if he had a bucket. Jon slipped sideways between two sharpened stakes while Ghost slid beneath them . A torch had been thrust down into a crevice, its flames flying pale orange banners when the gusts came . He snatched it up as he squeezed through the gap between the stones . Ghost went racing down the hill . Jon followed more slowly, the torch thrust out before him as he made his descent . The camp sounds faded behind him . The night was black, the slope steep, stony, and uneven . A moment ' s inattention would be a sure way to break an ankle . . . or his neck . What am I doing? he asked himself as he picked his way down. The trees stood beneath him, warriors armored in bark and leaf, deployed in their silent ranks awaiting the command to storm the hill . Black, they seemed . . . it was only when his torchlight brushed against them that Jon glimpsed a flash of green . Faintly, he heard the sound of water flowing over rocks . Ghost vanished in the underbrush . Jon struggled after him, listening to the call of the brook, to the leaves sighing in the wind . Branches clutched at his cloak, while overhead thick limbs twined together and shut out the stars. He found Ghost lapping from the stream . Ghost, he called, to me . Now . When the direwolf raised his head, his eyes glowed red and baleful, and water streamed down from his jaws like slaver . There was something fierce and terrible about him in that instant . And then he was off, bounding past Jon, racing through the trees . Ghost, no, stay, he shouted, but the wolf paid no heed . The lean white shape was swallowed by the dark, and Jon had only two choices—to climb the hill again, alone, or to follow. He followed, angry, holding the torch out low so he could see the rocks that threatened to trip him with every step, the thick roots that seemed to grab at his feet, the holes where a man could twist an ankle . Every few feet he called again for Ghost, but the night wind was swirling amongst the trees and it drank the words . This is madness, he thought as he plunged deeper into the trees . He was about to turn back when he glimpsed a flash of white off ahead and to the right, back toward the hill . He jogged after it, cursing under his breath. A quarter way around the Fist he chased the wolf before he lost him again . Finally he stopped to catch his breath amidst the scrub, thorns, and tumbled rocks at the base of the hill . Beyond the torchlight, the dark pressed close. A soft scrabbling noise made him turn . Jon moved toward the sound, stepping carefully among boulders and thornbushes . Behind a fallen tree, he came on Ghost again . The direwolf was digging furiously, kicking up dirt. Jon lowered the torch, revealing a rounded mound of soft earth . A grave, he thought . But whose? [BOS] What have you found? [EOS]  He knelt, jammed the torch into the ground beside him . The soil was loose, sandy . Jon pulled it out by the fistful . There were no stones, no roots . Whatever was here had been put here recently . Two feet down, his fingers touched cloth . He had been expecting a corpse, fearing a corpse, but this was something else . He pushed against the fabric and felt small, hard shapes beneath, unyielding . There was no smell, no sign of graveworms . Ghost backed off and sat on his haunches, watching. Jon brushed the loose soil away to reveal a rounded bundle perhaps two feet across . He jammed his fingers down around the edges and worked it loose . When he pulled it free, whatever was inside shifted and clinked . Treasure, he thought, but the shapes were wrong to be coins, and the sound was wrong for metal. A length of frayed rope bound the bundle together . Jon unsheathed his dagger and cut it, groped for the edges of the cloth, and pulled . The bundle turned, and its contents spilled out onto the ground, glittering dark and bright . He saw a dozen knives, leaf-shaped spearheads, numerous arrowheads . Jon picked up a dagger blade, featherlight and shiny black, hiltless . Torchlight ran along its edge, a thin orange line that spoke of razor sharpness . Dragonglass . What the maesters call obsidian . Had Ghost uncovered some ancient cache of the children of the forest, buried here for thousands of years? The Fist of the First Men was an old place, only . . . Beneath the dragonglass was an old warhorn, made from an auroch ' s horn and banded in bronze . Jon shook the dirt from inside it, and a stream of arrowheads fell out . He let them fall, and pulled up a corner of the cloth the weapons had been wrapped in, rubbing it between his fingers . Good wool, thick, a double weave, damp but not rotted . It could not have been long in the ground . And it was dark . He seized a handful and pulled it close to the torch . Not dark . Black. Even before Jon stood and shook it out, he knew what he had: the black cloak of a Sworn Brother of the Night ' s Watch. The call came drifting through the black of night . Jon pushed himself onto an elbow, his hand reaching for Longclaw by force of habit as the camp began to stir . The horn that wakes the sleepers, he thought. The long low note lingered at the edge of hearing . The sentries at the ringwall stood still in their footsteps, breath frosting and heads turned toward the west . As the sound of the horn faded, even the wind ceased to blow . Men rolled from their blankets and reached for spears and swordbelts, moving quietly, listening . A horse whickered and was hushed . For a heartbeat it seemed as if the whole forest were holding its breath . The brothers of the Night ' s Watch waited for a second blast, praying they should not hear it, fearing that they would. When the silence had stretched unbearably long and the men knew at last that the horn would not wind again, they grinned at one another sheepishly, as if to deny that they had been anxious . Jon Snow fed a few sticks to the fire, buckled on his swordbelt, pulled on his boots, shook the dirt and dew from the cloak, and fastened it around his shoulders . The flames blazed up beside him, welcome heat beating against his face as he dressed . He could hear the Lord Commander moving inside the tent . After a moment Mormont lifted the flap . " One blast? " On his shoulder, his raven sat fluffed and silent, looking miserable. Jon agreed [BOS] One, my lord, Brothers returning . [EOS]  Mormont moved to the fire . " The Halfhand . And past time . " He had grown more restive every day they waited; much longer and he would have been fit to whelp cubs . " See that there ' s hot food for the men and fodder for the horses . I ' ll see Qhorin at once . " I ' ll bring him, my lord . The men from the Shadow Tower had been expected days ago . When they had not appeared, the brothers had begun to wonder . Jon had heard gloomy mutterings around the cookfire, and not just from Dolorous Edd . Ser Ottyn Wythers was for retreating to Castle Black as soon as possible . Ser Mallador Locke would strike for the Shadow Tower, hoping to pick up Qhorin ' s trail and learn what had befallen him . And Thoren Smallwood wanted to push on into the mountains . Mance Rayder knows he must battle the Watch, Thoren had declared, but he will never look for us so far north . If we ride up the Milkwater, we can take him unawares and cut his host to ribbons before he knows we are on him. " The numbers would be greatly against us, " Ser Ottyn had objected . " Craster said he was gathering a great host . Many thousands . Without Qhorin, we are only two hundred . " " Send two hundred wolves against ten thousand sheep, ser, and see what happens, " said Smallwood confidently. " There are goats among these sheep, Thoren, " warned Jarman Buckwell . " Aye, and maybe a few lions . Rattleshirt, Harma the Dogshead, Alfyn Crowkiller . . . " " I know them as well as you do, Buckwell, " Thoren Smallwood snapped back . " And I mean to have their heads, every one . These are wildlings . No soldiers . A few hundred heroes, drunk most like, amidst a great horde of women, children, and thralls . We will sweep over them and send them howling back to their hovels . " They had argued for many hours, and reached no agreement . The Old Bear was too stubborn to retreat, but neither would he rush headlong up the Milkwater, seeking battle . In the end, nothing had been decided but to wait a few more days for the men from the Shadow Tower, and talk again if they did not appear. And now they had, which meant that the decision could be delayed no longer . Jon was glad of that much, at least . If they must battle Mance Rayder, let it be soon. He found Dolorous Edd at the fire, complaining about how difficult it was for him to sleep when people insisted on blowing horns in the woods . Jon gave him something new to complain about . Together they woke Hake, who received the Lord Commander ' s orders with a stream of curses, but got up all the same and soon had a dozen brothers cutting roots for a soup. Sam came puffing up as Jon crossed the camp . Under the black hood his face was as pale and round as the moon . " I heard the horn . Has your uncle come back? " " It ' s only the men from the Shadow Tower . " It was growing harder to cling to the hope of Benjen Stark ' s safe return . The cloak he had found beneath the Fist could well have belonged to his uncle or one of his men, even the Old Bear admitted as much, though why they would have buried it there, wrapped around the cache of dragonglass, no one could say . " Sam, I have to go . " At the ringwall, he found the guards sliding spikes from the half-frozen earth to make an opening . It was not long until the first of the brothers from the Shadow Tower began wending their way up the slope . All in leather and fur they were, with here and there a bit of steel or bronze; heavy beards covered hard lean faces, and made them look as shaggy as their garrons . Jon was surprised to see some of them were riding two to a horse . When he looked more closely, it was plain that many of them were wounded . There has been trouble on the way. Jon knew Qhorin Halfhand the instant he saw him, though they had never met . The big ranger was half a legend in the Watch; a man of slow words and swift action, tall and straight as a spear, long-limbed and solemn . Unlike his men, he was clean-shaven . His hair fell from beneath his helm in a heavy braid touched with hoarfrost, and the blacks he wore were so faded they might have been greys . Only thumb and forefinger remained on the hand that held the reins; the other fingers had been sheared off catching a wildling ' s axe that would otherwise have split his skull . It was told that he had thrust his maimed fist into the face of the axeman so the blood spurted into his eyes, and slew him while he was blind . Since that day, the wildlings beyond the Wall had known no foe more implacable. Jon hailed him [BOS] Lord Commander Mormont would see you at once . I ' ll show you to his tent . [EOS]  Qhorin swung down from his saddle . " My men are hungry, and our horses require tending . " " They ' ll all be seen to . " The ranger gave his horse into the care of one of his men and followed . " You are Jon Snow . You have your father ' s look . " " Did you know him, my lord? " " I am no lordling . Only a brother of the Night ' s Watch . I knew Lord Eddard, yes . And his father before him . " Jon had to hurry his steps to keep up with Qhorin ' s long strides [BOS] Lord Rickard died before I was born . [EOS]  " He was a friend to the Watch . " Qhorin glanced behind . " It is said that a direwolf runs with you . " " Ghost should be back by dawn . He hunts at night . " They found Dolorous Edd frying a rasher of bacon and boiling a dozen eggs in a kettle over the Old Bear ' s cookfire . Mormont sat in his wood-and-leather camp chair . " I had begun to fear for you . Did you meet with trouble? " " We met with Alfyn Crowkiller . Mance had sent him to scout along the Wall, and we chanced on him returning . " Qhorin removed his helm . " Alfyn will trouble the realm no longer, but some of his company escaped us . We hunted down as many as we could, but it may be that a few will win back to the mountains . " " And the cost? " " Four brothers dead . A dozen wounded . A third as many as the foe . And we took captives . One died quickly from his wounds, but the other lived long enough to be questioned . " " Best talk of this inside . Jon will fetch you a horn of ale . Or would you prefer hot spiced wine? " " Boiled water will suffice . An egg and a bite of bacon . " " As you wish . " Mormont lifted the flap of the tent and Qhorin Halfhand stooped and stepped through. Edd stood over the kettle swishing the eggs about with a spoon . " I envy those eggs, " he said . " I could do with a bit of boiling about now . If the kettle were larger, I might jump in . Though I would sooner it were wine than water . There are worse ways to die than warm and drunk . I knew a brother drowned himself in wine once . It was a poor vintage, though, and his corpse did not improve it . " " You drank the wine? " " It ' s an awful thing to find a brother dead . You ' d have need of a drink as well, Lord Snow . " Edd stirred the kettle and added a pinch more nutmeg. Restless, Jon squatted by the fire and poked at it with a stick . He could hear the Old Bear ' s voice inside the tent, punctuated by the raven ' s squawks and Qhorin Halfhand ' s quieter tones, but he could not make out the words . Alfyn Crowkiller dead, that ' s good . He was one of the bloodiest of the wildling raiders, taking his name from the black brothers he ' d slain . So why does Qhorin sound so grave, after such a victory? Jon had hoped that the arrival of men from the Shadow Tower would lift the spirits in the camp . Only last night, he was coming back through the dark from a piss when he heard five or six men talking in low voices around the embers of a fire . When he heard Chett muttering that it was past time they turned back, Jon stopped to listen . " It ' s an old man ' s folly, this ranging, " he heard . " We ' ll find nothing but our graves in them mountains . " " There ' s giants in the Frostfangs, and wargs, and worse things, " said Lark the Sisterman. " I ' ll not be going there, I promise you . " " The Old Bear ' s not like to give you a choice . " " Might be we won ' t give him one, " said Chett. Just then one of the dogs had raised his head and growled, and he had to move away quickly, before he was seen . I was not meant to hear that, he thought . He considered taking the tale to Mormont, but he could not bring himself to inform on his brothers, even brothers such as Chett and the Sisterman . It was just empty talk, he told himself . They are cold and afraid; we all are . It was hard waiting here, perched on the stony summit above the forest, wondering what the morrow might bring . The unseen enemy is always the most fearsome. Jon slid his new dagger from its sheath and studied the flames as they played against the shiny black glass . He had fashioned the wooden hilt himself, and wound hempen twine around it to make a grip . Ugly, but it served . Dolorous Edd opined that glass knives were about as useful as nipples on a knight ' s breastplate, but Jon was not so certain . The dragonglass blade was sharper than steel, albeit far more brittle. It must have been buried for a reason. He had made a dagger for Grenn as well, and another for the Lord Commander . The warhorn he had given to Sam . On closer examination the horn had proved cracked, and even after he had cleaned all the dirt out, Jon had been unable to get any sound from it . The rim was chipped as well, but Sam liked old things, even worthless old things . Jon told him, [BOS] Make a drinking horn out of it, and every time you take a drink you ' ll remember how you ranged beyond the Wall, all the way to the Fist of the First Men . [EOS] He gave Sam a spearhead and a dozen arrowheads as well, and passed the rest out among his other friends for luck. The Old Bear had seemed pleased by the dagger, but he preferred a steel knife at his belt, Jon had noticed . Mormont could offer no answers as to who might have buried the cloak or what it might mean . Perhaps Qhorin will know . The Halfhand had ventured deeper into the wild than any other living man. " You want to serve, or shall I? " Jon sheathed the dagger [BOS] I ' ll do it . [EOS] He wanted to hear what they were saying. Edd cut three thick slices off a stale round of oat bread, stacked them on a wooden platter, covered them with bacon and bacon drippings, and filled a bowl with hard-cooked eggs . Jon took the bowl in one hand and the platter in the other and backed into the Lord Commander ' s tent. Qhorin was seated cross-legged on the floor, his spine as straight as a spear . Candlelight flickered against the hard flat planes of his cheeks as he spoke . " . . . Rattleshirt, the Weeping Man, and every other chief great and small, " he was saying . " They have wargs as well, and mammoths, and more strength than we would have dreamed . Or so he claimed . I will not swear as to the truth of it . Ebben believes the man was telling us tales to make his life last a little longer . " " True or false, the Wall must be warned, " the Old Bear said as Jon placed the platter between them . " And the king . " " Which king? " " All of them . The true and the false alike . If they would claim the realm, let them defend it . " The Halfhand helped himself to an egg and cracked it on the edge of the bowl . " These kings will do what they will, " he said, peeling away the shell . " Likely it will be little enough . The best hope is Winterfell . The Starks must rally the north . " " Yes . To be sure . " The Old Bear unrolled a map, frowned at it, tossed it aside, opened another . He was pondering where the hammer would fall, Jon could see it . The Watch had once manned seventeen castles along the hundred leagues of the Wall, but they had been abandoned one by one as the brotherhood dwindled . Only three were now garrisoned, a fact that Mance Rayder knew as well as they did . " Ser Alliser Thorne will bring back fresh levies from King ' s Landing, we can hope . If we man Greyguard from the Shadow Tower and the Long Barrow from Eastwatch . . . " " Greyguard has largely collapsed . Stonedoor would serve better, if the men could be found . Icemark and Deep Lake as well, mayhaps . With daily patrols along the battlements between . " " Patrols, aye . Twice a day, if we can . The Wall itself is a formidable obstacle . Undefended, it cannot stop them, yet it will delay them . The larger the host, the longer they ' ll require . From the emptiness they ' ve left behind, they must mean to bring their women with them . Their young as well, and beasts . . . have you ever seen a goat climb a ladder? A rope? They will need to build a stair, or a great ramp . . . it will take a moon ' s turn at the least, perhaps longer . Mance will know his best chance is to pass beneath the Wall . Through a gate, or . . . " " A breach . " Mormont ' s head came up sharply . " What? " " They do not plan to climb the Wall nor to burrow beneath it, my lord . They plan to break it . " " The Wall is seven hundred feet high, and so thick at the base that it would take a hundred men a year to cut through it with picks and axes . " " Even so . " Mormont plucked at his beard, frowning . " How? " " How else? Sorcery . " Qhorin bit the egg in half . " Why else would Mance choose to gather his strength in the Frostfangs? Bleak and hard they are, and a long weary march from the Wall . " " I ' d hoped he chose the mountains to hide his muster from the eyes of my rangers . " " Perhaps, " said Qhorin, finishing the egg, " but there is more, I think . He is seeking something in the high cold places . He is searching for something he needs . " " Something? " Mormont ' s raven lifted its head and screamed . The sound was sharp as a knife in the closeness of the tent. " Some power . What it is, our captive could not say . He was questioned perhaps too sharply, and died with much unsaid . I doubt he knew in any case . " Jon could hear the wind outside . It made a high thin sound as it shivered through the stones of the ringwall and tugged at the tent ropes . Mormont rubbed his mouth thoughtfully . " Some power, " he repeated . " I must know . " " Then you must send scouts into the mountains . " " I am loath to risk more men . " " We can only die . Why else do we don these black cloaks, but to die in defense of the realm? I would send fifteen men, in three parties of five . One to probe the Milkwater, one the Skirling Pass, one to climb the Giant ' s Stair . Jarman Buckwell, Thoren Smallwood, and myself to command . To learn what waits in those mountains . " " Waits, " the raven cried . " Waits . " Lord Commander Mormont sighed deep in his chest . " I see no other choice, " he conceded, " but if you do not return . . . " " Someone will come down out of the Frostfangs, my lord, " the ranger said . " If us, all well and good . If not, it will be Mance Rayder, and you sit square in his path . He cannot march south and leave you behind, to follow and harry his rear . He must attack . This is a strong place . " " Not that strong, " said Mormont. " Belike we shall all die, then . Our dying will buy time for our brothers on the Wall . Time to garrison the empty castles and freeze shut the gates, time to summon lords and kings to their aid, time to hone their axes and repair their catapults . Our lives will be coin well spent . " Die, the raven muttered, pacing along Mormont ' s shoulders . Die, die, die, die . The Old Bear sat slumped and silent, as if the burden of speech had grown too heavy for him to bear . But at last he said, May the gods forgive me . Choose your men. Qhorin Halfhand turned his head . His eyes met Jon ' s, and held them for a long moment . " Very well . I choose Jon Snow . " Mormont blinked . " He is hardly more than a boy . And my steward besides . Not even a ranger . " " Tollett can care for you as well, my lord . " Qhorin lifted his maimed, two-fingered hand . " The old gods are still strong beyond the Wall . The gods of the First Men . . . and the Starks . " Mormont looked at Jon . " What is your will in this? " " To go, " he said at once. The old man smiled sadly . " I thought it might be . " Dawn had broken when Jon stepped from the tent beside Qhorin Halfhand . The wind swirled around them, stirring their black cloaks and sending a scatter of red cinders flying from the fire. " We ride at noon, " the ranger told him . " Best find that wolf of yours . " They could see the fire in the night, glimmering against the side of the mountain like a fallen star . It burned redder than the other stars, and did not twinkle, though sometimes it flared up bright and sometimes dwindled down to no more than a distant spark, dull and faint. Half a mile ahead and two thousand feet up, Jon judged, and perfectly placed to see anything moving in the pass below. " Watchers in the Skirling Pass, " wondered the oldest among them . In the spring of his youth, he had been squire to a king, so the black brothers still called him Squire Dalbridge . " What is it Mance Rayder fears, I wonder? " " If he knew they ' d lit a fire, he ' d flay the poor bastards, " said Ebben, a squat bald man muscled like a bag of rocks. " Fire is life up here, " said Qhorin Halfhand, " but it can be death as well . " By his command, they ' d risked no open flames since entering the mountains . They ate cold salt beef, hard bread, and harder cheese, and slept clothed and huddled beneath a pile of cloaks and furs, grateful for each other ' s warmth . It made Jon remember cold nights long ago at Winterfell, when he ' d shared a bed with his brothers . These men were brothers too, though the bed they shared was stone and earth. " They ' ll have a horn, " said Stonesnake. The Halfhand said, " A horn they must not blow . " " That ' s a long cruel climb by night, " Ebben said as he eyed the distant spark through a cleft in the rocks that sheltered them . The sky was cloudless, the jagged mountains rising black on black until the very top, where their cold crowns of snow and ice shone palely in the moonlight. " And a longer fall, " said Qhorin Halfhand . " Two men, I think . There are like to be two up there, sharing the watch . " " Me . " The ranger they called Stonesnake had already shown that he was the best climber among them . It would have to be him. " And me, " said Jon Snow. Qhorin Halfhand looked at him . Jon could hear the wind keening as it shivered through the high pass above them . One of the garrons whickered and pawed at the thin stony soil of the hollow where they had taken shelter . The wolf will remain with us, Qhorin said . White fur is seen too easily by moonlight . He turned to Stonesnake . When it ' s done, throw down a burning brand . We ' ll come when we see it fall. " No better time to start than now, " said Stonesnake. They each took a long coil of rope . Stonesnake carried a bag of iron spikes as well, and a small hammer with its head wrapped in thick felt . Their garrons they left behind, along with their helms, mail, and Ghost . Jon knelt and let the direwolf nuzzle him before they set off . " Stay, " he commanded . " I ' ll be back for you . " Stonesnake took the lead . He was a short wiry man, near fifty and grey of beard but stronger than he seemed, and he had the best night eyes of anyone Jon had ever known . He needed them tonight . By day the mountains were blue-grey, brushed with frost, but once the sun vanished behind the jagged peaks they turned black . Now the rising moon had limned them in white and silver. The black brothers moved through black shadows amidst black rocks, working their way up a steep, twisting trail as their breath frosted in the black air . Jon felt almost naked without his mail, but he did not miss its weight . This was hard going, and slow . To hurry here was to risk a broken ankle or worse . Stonesnake seemed to know where to put his feet as if by instinct, but Jon needed to be more careful on the broken, uneven ground. The Skirling Pass was really a series of passes, a long twisting course that went up around a succession of icy wind-carved peaks and down through hidden valleys that seldom saw the sun . Apart from his companions, Jon had glimpsed no living man since they ' d left the wood behind and begun to make their way upward . The Frostfangs were as cruel as any place the gods had made, and as inimical to men . The wind cut like a knife up here, and shrilled in the night like a mother mourning her slain children . What few trees they saw were stunted, grotesque things growing sideways out of cracks and fissures . Tumbled shelves of rock often overhung the trail, fringed with hanging icicles that looked like long white teeth from a distance. Yet even so, Jon Snow was not sorry he had come . There were wonders here as well . He had seen sunlight flashing on icy thin waterfalls as they plunged over the lips of sheer stone cliffs, and a mountain meadow full of autumn wildflowers, blue coldsnaps and bright scarlet frostfires and stands of piper ' s grass in russet and gold . He had peered down ravines so deep and black they seemed certain to end in some hell, and he had ridden his garron over a wind-eaten bridge of natural stone with nothing but sky to either side . Eagles nested in the heights and came down to hunt the valleys, circling effortlessly on great blue-grey wings that seemed almost part of the sky . Once he had watched a shadowcat stalk a ram, flowing down the mountainside like liquid smoke until it was ready to pounce. Now it is our turn to pounce . He wished he could move as sure and silent as that shadowcat, and kill as quickly . Longclaw was sheathed across his back, but he might not have room to use it . He carried dirk and dagger for closer work . They will have weapons as well, and I am not armored . He wondered who would prove the shadowcat by night ' s end, and who the ram. For a long way they stayed to the trail, following its twists and turns as it snaked along the side of the mountain, upward, ever upward . Sometimes the mountain folded back on itself and they lost sight of the fire, but soon or late it would always reappear . The path Stonesnake chose would never have served for the horses . In places Jon had to put his back to the cold stone and shuffle along sideways like a crab, inch by inch . Even where the track widened it was treacherous; there were cracks big enough to swallow a man ' s leg, rubble to stumble over, hollow places where the water pooled by day and froze hard by night . One step and then another, Jon told himself . One step and then another, and I will not fall. He had not shaved since leaving the Fist of the First Men, and the hair on his lip was soon stiff with frost . Two hours into the climb, the wind kicked up so fiercely that it was all he could do to hunch down and cling to the rock, praying he would not be blown off the mountain . One step and then another, he resumed when the gale subsided . One step and then another, and I will not fall. Soon they were high enough so that looking down was best not considered . There was nothing below but yawning blackness, nothing above but moon and stars . " The mountain is your mother, " Stonesnake had told him during an easier climb a few days past . " Cling to her, press your face up against her teats, and she won ' t drop you . " Jon had made a joke of it, saying how he ' d always wondered who his mother was, but never thought to find her in the Frostfangs . It did not seem nearly so amusing now . One step and then another, he thought, clinging tight. The narrow track ended abruptly where a massive shoulder of black granite thrust out from the side of the mountain . After the bright moonlight, its shadow was so black that it felt like stepping into a cave . Straight up here, the ranger said in a quiet voice . We want to get above them . He peeled off his gloves, tucked them through his belt, tied one end of his rope around his waist, the other end around Jon . Follow me when the rope grows taut . The ranger did not wait for an answer but started at once, moving upward with fingers and feet, faster than Jon would have believed . The long rope unwound slowly . Jon watched him closely, making note of how he went, and where he found each handhold, and when the last loop of hemp uncoiled, he took off his own gloves and followed, much more slowly. Stonesnake had passed the rope around the smooth spike of rock he was waiting on, but as soon as Jon reached him he shook it loose and was off again . This time there was no convenient cleft when he reached the end of their tether, so he took out his felt-headed hammer and drove a spike deep into a crack in the stone with a series of gentle taps . Soft as the sounds were, they echoed off the stone so loudly that Jon winced with every blow, certain that the wildlings must hear them too . When the spike was secure, Stonesnake secured the rope to it, and Jon started after him . Suck on the mountain ' s teat, he reminded himself . Don ' t look down . Keep your weight above your feet . Don ' t look down . Look at the rock in front of you . There ' s a good handhold, yes . Don ' t look down . I can catch a breath on that ledge there, all I need to do is reach it . Never look down. Once his foot slipped as he put his weight on it and his heart stopped in his chest, but the gods were good and he did not fall . He could feel the cold seeping off the rock into his fingers, but he dared not don his gloves; gloves would slip, no matter how tight they seemed, cloth and fur moving between skin and stone, and up here that could kill him . His burned hand was stiffening up on him, and soon it began to ache . Then he ripped open his thumbnail somehow, and after that he left smears of blood wherever he put his hand . He hoped he still had all his fingers by the end of the climb. Up they went, and up, and up, black shadows creeping across the moonlit wall of rock . Anyone down on the floor of the pass could have seen them easily, but the mountain hid them from the view of the wildlings by their fire . They were close now, though . Jon could sense it . Even so, he did not think of the foes who were waiting for him, all unknowing, but of his brother at Winterfell . Bran used to love to climb . I wish I had a tenth part of his courage. The wall was broken two-thirds of the way up by a crooked fissure of icy stone . Stonesnake reached down a hand to help him up . He had donned his gloves again, so Jon did the same . The ranger moved his head to the left, and the two of them crawled along the shelf three hundred yards or more, until they could see the dull orange glow beyond the lip of the cliff. The wildlings had built their watchfire in a shallow depression above the narrowest part of the pass, with a sheer drop below and rock behind to shelter them from the worst of the wind . That same windbreak allowed the black brothers to crawl within a few feet of them, creeping along on their bellies until they were looking down on the men they must kill. One was asleep, curled up tight and buried beneath a great mound of skins . Jon could see nothing of him but his hair, bright red in the firelight . The second sat close to the flames, feeding them twigs and branches and complaining of the wind in a querulous tone . The third watched the pass, though there was little to see, only a vast bowl of darkness ringed by the snowy shoulders of the mountains . It was the watcher who wore the horn. Three . For a moment Jon was uncertain . There was only supposed to be two . One was asleep, though . And whether there was two or three or twenty, he still must do what he had come to do . Stonesnake touched his arm, pointed at the wildling with the horn . Jon nodded toward the one by the fire . It felt queer, picking a man to kill . Half the days of his life had been spent with sword and shield, training for this moment . Did Robb feel this way before his first battle? he wondered, but there was no time to ponder the question . Stonesnake moved as fast as his namesake, leaping down on the wildlings in a rain of pebbles . Jon slid Longclaw from its sheath and followed. It all seemed to happen in a heartbeat . Afterward Jon could admire the courage of the wildling who reached first for his horn instead of his blade . He got it to his lips, but before he could sound it Stonesnake knocked the horn aside with a swipe of his shortsword . Jon ' s man leapt to his feet, thrusting at his face with a burning brand . He could feel the heat of the flames as he flinched back . Out of the corner of his eye, he saw the sleeper stirring, and knew he must finish his man quick . When the brand swung again, he bulled into it, swinging the bastard sword with both hands . The Valyrian steel sheared through leather, fur, wool, and flesh, but when the wildling fell he twisted, ripping the sword from Jon ' s grasp . On the ground the sleeper sat up beneath his furs . Jon slid his dirk free, grabbing the man by the hair and jamming the point of the knife up under his chin as he reached for his—no, her— His hand froze . " A girl . " " A watcher, " said Stonesnake . " A wildling . Finish her . " Jon could see fear and fire in her eyes . Blood ran down her white throat from where the point of his dirk had pricked her . One thrust and it ' s done, he told himself . He was so close he could smell onion on her breath . She is no older than I am . Something about her made him think of Arya, though they looked nothing at all alike [BOS] Will you yield? [EOS] he asked, giving the dirk a half turn . And if she doesn ' t? " I yield . " Her words steamed in the cold air. " You ' re our captive, then . " He pulled the dirk away from the soft skin of her throat. " Qhorin said nothing of taking captives, " said Stonesnake. " He never said not to . " Jon let go his grip on the girl ' s hair, and she scuttled backward, away from them. " She ' s a spearwife . " Stonesnake gestured at the long-hafted axe that lay beside her sleeping furs . " She was reaching for that when you grabbed her . Give her half a chance and she ' ll bury it between your eyes . " Jon kicked the axe well out of the girl ' s reach [BOS] I won ' t give her half a chance . Do you have a name? [EOS]  " Ygritte . " Her hand rubbed at her throat and came away bloody . She stared at the wetness. Sheathing his dirk, he wrenched Longclaw free from the body of the man he ' d killed . " You are my captive, Ygritte . " " I gave you my name . " " I ' m Jon Snow . " She flinched . " An evil name . " " A bastard name, " he said . " My father was Lord Eddard Stark of Winterfell . " The girl watched him warily, but Stonesnake gave a mordant chuckle . " It ' s the captive supposed to tell things, remember? " The ranger thrust a long branch into the fire . " Not that she will . I ' ve known wildlings to bite off their own tongues before they ' d answer a question . " When the end of the branch was blazing merrily, he took two steps and flung it out over the pass . It fell through the night spinning until it was lost to sight. " You ought to burn them you killed, " said Ygritte. " Need a bigger fire for that, and big fires burn bright . " Stonesnake turned, his eyes scanning the black distance for any spark of light . " Are there more wildlings close by, is that it? " " Burn them, " the girl repeated stubbornly, " or it might be you ' ll need them swords again . " Jon remembered dead Othor and his cold black hands [BOS] Maybe we should do as she says . [EOS]  " There are other ways . " Stonesnake knelt beside the man he ' d slain, stripped him of cloak and boots and belt and vest, then hoisted the body over one thin shoulder and carried it to the edge . He grunted as he tossed it over . A moment later they heard a wet, heavy smack well below them . By then the ranger had the second body down to the skin and was dragging it by the arms . Jon took the feet and together they flung the dead man out in the blackness of the night. Ygritte watched and said nothing . She was older than he ' d thought at first, Jon realized; maybe as old as twenty, but short for her age, bandy-legged, with a round face, small hands, and a pug nose . Her shaggy mop of red hair stuck out in all directions . She looked plump as she crouched there, but most of that was layers of fur and wool and leather . Underneath all that she could be as skinny as Arya. Jon asked her [BOS] Were you sent to watch for us? [EOS]  " You, and others . " Stonesnake warmed his hands over the fire . " What waits beyond the pass? " " The free folk . " " How many? " " Hundreds and thousands . More than you ever saw, crow . " She smiled . Her teeth were crooked, but very white. She doesn ' t know how many . " Why come here? " Ygritte fell silent. " What ' s in the Frostfangs that your king could want? You can ' t stay here, there ' s no food . " She turned her face away from him. " Do you mean to march on the Wall? When? " She stared at the flames as if she could not hear him. " Do you know anything of my uncle, Benjen Stark? " Ygritte ignored him . Stonesnake laughed . " If she spits out her tongue, don ' t say I didn ' t warn you . " A low rumbling growl echoed off the rock . Shadowcat, Jon knew at once . As he rose he heard another, closer at hand . He pulled his sword and turned, listening. " They won ' t trouble us, " Ygritte said . " It ' s the dead they ' ve come for . Cats can smell blood six miles off . They ' ll stay near the bodies till they ' ve eaten every last stringy shred o ' meat, and cracked the bones for the marrow . " Jon could hear the sounds of their feeding echoing off the rocks . It gave him an uneasy feeling . The warmth of the fire made him realize how bone-tired he was, but he dared not sleep . He had taken a captive, and it was on him to guard her . " Were they your kin? " he asked her quietly . " The two we killed? " " No more than you are . " " Me? " He frowned . " What do you mean? " " You said you were the Bastard o ' Winterfell . " " I am . " " Who was your mother? " " Some woman . Most of them are . " Someone had said that to him once . He did not remember who. She smiled again, a flash of white teeth . " And she never sung you the song o ' the winter rose? " " I never knew my mother . Or any such song . " " Bael the Bard made it, " said Ygritte . " He was King-beyond-the-Wall a long time back . All the free folk know his songs, but might be you don ' t sing them in the south . " Jon objected [BOS] Winterfell ' s not in the south, [EOS]  " Yes it is . Everything below the Wall ' s south to us . " He had never thought of it that way . " I suppose it ' s all in where you ' re standing . " " Aye, " Ygritte agreed . " It always is . " Jon urged her . It would be hours before Qhorin came up, and a story would help keep him awake [BOS] Tell me, I want to hear this tale of yours . [EOS]  " Might be you won ' t like it much . " " I ' ll hear it all the same . " " Brave black crow, " she mocked . " Well, long before he was king over the free folk, Bael was a great raider . " Stonesnake gave a snort . " A murderer, robber, and raper, is what you mean . " " That ' s all in where you ' re standing too, " Ygritte said . " The Stark in Winterfell wanted Bael ' s head, but never could take him, and the taste o ' failure galled him . One day in his bitterness he called Bael a craven who preyed only on the weak . When word o ' that got back, Bael vowed to teach the lord a lesson . So he scaled the Wall, skipped down the kingsroad, and walked into Winterfell one winter ' s night with harp in hand, naming himself Sygerrik of Skagos . Sygerrik means ‘ deceiver ' in the Old Tongue, that the First Men spoke, and the giants still speak . " " North or south, singers always find a ready welcome, so Bael ate at Lord Stark ' s own table, and played for the lord in his high seat until half the night was gone . The old songs he played, and new ones he ' d made himself, and he played and sang so well that when he was done, the lord offered to let him name his own reward . ‘ All I ask is a flower, ' Bael answered, ‘ the fairest flower that blooms in the gardens o ' Winterfell . ' " " Now as it happened the winter roses had only then come into bloom, and no flower is so rare nor precious . So the Stark sent to his glass gardens and commanded that the most beautiful o ' the winter roses be plucked for the singer ' s payment . And so it was done . But when morning come, the singer had vanished . . . and so had Lord Brandon ' s maiden daughter . Her bed they found empty, but for the pale blue rose that Bael had left on the pillow where her head had lain . " Jon had never heard this tale before [BOS] Which Brandon was this supposed to be? Brandon the Builder lived in the Age of Heroes, thousands of years before Bael . There was Brandon the Burner and his father Brandon the Shipwright, but— [EOS]  " This was Brandon the Daughterless, " Ygritte said sharply . " Would you hear the tale, or no? " He scowled . " Go on . " " Lord Brandon had no other children . At his behest, the black crows flew forth from their castles in the hundreds, but nowhere could they find any sign o ' Bael or this maid . For most a year they searched, till the lord lost heart and took to his bed, and it seemed as though the line o ' Starks was at its end . But one night as he lay waiting to die, Lord Brandon heard a child ' s cry . He followed the sound and found his daughter back in her bedchamber, asleep with a babe at her breast . " " Bael had brought her back? " " No . They had been in Winterfell all the time, hiding with the dead beneath the castle . The maid loved Bael so dearly she bore him a son, the song says . . . though if truth be told, all the maids love Bael in them songs he wrote . Be that as it may, what ' s certain is that Bael left the child in payment for the rose he ' d plucked unasked, and that the boy grew to be the next Lord Stark . So there it is—you have Bael ' s blood in you, same as me . " Jon said [BOS] It never happened, [EOS]  She shrugged . " Might be it did, might be it didn ' t . It is a good song, though . My mother used to sing it to me . She was a woman too, Jon Snow . Like yours . " She rubbed her throat where his dirk had cut her . " The song ends when they find the babe, but there is a darker end to the story . Thirty years later, when Bael was King-beyond-the-Wall and led the free folk south, it was young Lord Stark who met him at the Frozen Ford . . . and killed him, for Bael would not harm his own son when they met sword to sword . " " So the son slew the father instead, " said Jon. " Aye, " she said, " but the gods hate kinslayers, even when they kill unknowing . When Lord Stark returned from the battle and his mother saw Bael ' s head upon his spear, she threw herself from a tower in her grief . Her son did not long outlive her . One o ' his lords peeled the skin off him and wore him for a cloak . " " Your Bael was a liar, " he told her, certain now. " No, " Ygritte said, " but a bard ' s truth is different than yours or mine . Anyway, you asked for the story, so I told it . " She turned away from him, closed her eyes, and seemed to sleep. Dawn and Qhorin Halfhand arrived together . The black stones had turned to grey and the eastern sky had gone indigo when Stonesnake spied the rangers below, wending their way upward . Jon woke his captive and held her by the arm as they descended to meet them . Thankfully, there was another way off the mountain to the north and west, along paths much gentler than the one that had brought them up here . They were waiting in a narrow defile when their brothers appeared, leading their garrons . Ghost raced ahead at first scent of them . Jon squatted to let the direwolf close his jaws around his wrist, tugging his hand back and forth . It was a game they played . But when he glanced up, he saw Ygritte watching with eyes as wide and white as hen ' s eggs. Qhorin Halfhand made no comment when he saw the prisoner . " There were three, " Stonesnake told him . No more than that. " We passed two, " Ebben said, " or what the cats had left of them . " He eyed the girl sourly, suspicion plain on his face. Jon felt compelled to say [BOS] She yielded, [EOS]  Qhorin ' s face was impassive . " Do you know who I am? " " Qhorin Halfhand . " The girl looked half a child beside him, but she faced him boldly. " Tell me true . If I fell into the hands of your people and yielded myself, what would it win me? " " A slower death than elsewise . " The big ranger looked to Jon . " We have no food to feed her, nor can we spare a man to watch her . " " The way before us is perilous enough, lad, " said Squire Dalbridge . " One shout when we need silence, and every man of us is doomed . " Ebben drew his dagger . " A steel kiss will keep her quiet . " Jon ' s throat was raw . He looked at them all helplessly [BOS] She yielded herself to me . [EOS]  Then you must do what needs be done, Qhorin Halfhand said . You are the blood of Winterfell and a man of the Night ' s Watch . He looked at the others . Come, brothers . Leave him to it . It will go easier for him if we do not watch . And he led them up the steep twisting trail toward the pale pink glow of the sun where it broke through a mountain cleft, and before very long only Jon and Ghost remained with the wildling girl. He thought Ygritte might try to run, but she only stood there, waiting, looking at him . " You never killed a woman before, did you? " When he shook his head, she said, " We die the same as men . But you don ' t need to do it . Mance would take you, I know he would . There ' s secret ways . Them crows would never catch us . " Jon said [BOS] I ' m as much a crow as they are, [EOS]  She nodded, resigned . " Will you burn me, after? " " I can ' t . The smoke might be seen . " " That ' s so . " She shrugged . " Well, there ' s worse places to end up than the belly of a shadowcat . " He pulled Longclaw over a shoulder . " Aren ' t you afraid? " Last night I was, she admitted . But now the sun ' s up . She pushed her hair aside to bare her neck, and knelt before him . Strike hard and true, crow, or I ' ll come back and haunt you. Longclaw was not so long or heavy a sword as his father ' s Ice, but it was Valyrian steel all the same . He touched the edge of the blade to mark where the blow must fall, and Ygritte shivered . " That ' s cold, " she said . " Go on, be quick about it . " He raised Longclaw over his head, both hands tight around the grip . One cut, with all my weight behind it . He could give her a quick clean death, at least . He was his father ' s son . Wasn ' t he? Wasn ' t he? " Do it, " she urged him after a moment . " Bastard . Do it . I can ' t stay brave forever . " When the blow did not fall she turned her head to look at him. Jon lowered his sword [BOS] Go, [EOS] he muttered. Ygritte stared. " Now, " he said, " before my wits return . Go . " She went. It was dark in the Skirling Pass . The great stone flanks of the mountains hid the sun for most of the day, so they rode in shadow, the breath of man and horse steaming in the cold air . Icy fingers of water trickled down from the snowpack above into small frozen pools that cracked and broke beneath the hooves of their garrons . Sometimes they would see a few weeds struggling from some crack in the rock or a splotch of pale lichen, but there was no grass, and they were above the trees now. The track was as steep as it was narrow, wending its way ever upward . Where the pass was so constricted that rangers had to go single file, Squire Dalbridge would take the lead, scanning the heights as he went, his longbow ever close to hand . It was said he had the keenest eyes in the Night ' s Watch. Ghost padded restlessly by Jon ' s side . From time to time he would stop and turn, his ears pricked, as if he heard something behind them . Jon did not think the shadowcats would attack living men, not unless they were starving, but he loosened Longclaw in its scabbard even so. A wind-carved arch of grey stone marked the highest point of the pass . Here the way broadened as it began its long descent toward the valley of the Milkwater . Qhorin decreed that they would rest here until the shadows began to grow again . " Shadows are friends to men in black, " he said. Jon saw the sense of that . It would be pleasant to ride in the light for a time, to let the bright mountain sun soak through their cloaks and chase the chill from their bones, but they dared not . Where there were three watchers there might be others, waiting to sound the alarm. Stonesnake curled up under his ragged fur cloak and was asleep almost at once . Jon shared his salt beef with Ghost while Ebben and Squire Dalbridge fed the horses . Qhorin Halfhand sat with his back to a rock, honing the edge of his longsword with long slow strokes . Jon watched the ranger for a few moments, then summoned his courage and went to him . " My lord, " he said, " you never asked me how it went . With the girl . " " I am no lord, Jon Snow . " Qhorin slid the stone smoothly along the steel with his two-fingered hand. " She told me Mance would take me, if I ran with her . " " She told you true . " " She even claimed we were kin . She told me a story . . . " " . . . of Bael the Bard and the rose of Winterfell . So Stonesnake told me . It happens I know the song . Mance would sing it of old, when he came back from a ranging . He had a passion for wildling music . Aye, and for their women as well . " " You knew him? " " We all knew him . " His voice was sad. They were friends as well as brothers, Jon realized, and now they are sworn foes . " Why did he desert? " " For a wench, some say . For a crown, others would have it . " Qhorin tested the edge of his sword with the ball of his thumb . " He liked women, Mance did, and he was not a man whose knees bent easily, that ' s true . But it was more than that . He loved the wild better than the Wall . It was in his blood . He was wildling born, taken as a child when some raiders were put to the sword . When he left the Shadow Tower he was only going home again . " " Was he a good ranger? " " He was the best of us, " said the Halfhand, " and the worst as well . Only fools like Thoren Smallwood despise the wildlings . They are as brave as we are, Jon . As strong, as quick, as clever . But they have no discipline . They name themselves the free folk, and each one thinks himself as good as a king and wiser than a maester . Mance was the same . He never learned how to obey . " " No more than me, " said Jon quietly. Qhorin ' s shrewd grey eyes seemed to see right through him . " So you let her go? " He did not sound the least surprised. " You know? " " Now . Tell me why you spared her . " It was hard to put into words . Jon stared down at his hands helplessly [BOS] My father never used a headsman . He said he owed it to men he killed to look into their eyes and hear their last words . And when I looked into Ygritte ' s eyes, I . . . I know she was an enemy, but there was no evil in her . [EOS]  " No more than in the other two . " Jon said [BOS] It was their lives or ours, If they had seen us, if they had sounded that horn . . . [EOS]  " The wildlings would hunt us down and slay us, true enough . " " Stonesnake has the horn now, though, and we took Ygritte ' s knife and axe . She ' s behind us, afoot, unarmed . . . " " And not like to be a threat, " Qhorin agreed . " If I had needed her dead, I would have left her with Ebben, or done the thing myself . " " Then why did you command it of me? " " I did not command it . I told you to do what needed to be done, and left you to decide what that would be . " Qhorin stood and slid his longsword back into its scabbard . " When I want a mountain scaled, I call on Stonesnake . Should I need to put an arrow through the eye of some foe across a windy battlefield, I summon Squire Dalbridge . Ebben can make any man give up his secrets . To lead men you must know them, Jon Snow . I know more of you now than I did this morning . " " And if I had slain her? " asked Jon. " She would be dead, and I would know you better than I had before . But enough talk . You ought be sleeping . We have leagues to go, and dangers to face . You will need your strength . " Jon did not think sleep would come easily, but he knew the Halfhand was right . He found a place out of the wind, beneath an overhang of rock, and took off his cloak to use it for a blanket . Ghost, he called . Here . To me . He always slept better with the great white wolf beside him; there was comfort in the smell of him, and welcome warmth in that shaggy pale fur . This time, though, Ghost did no more than look at him . Then he turned away and padded around the garrons, and quick as that he was gone . He wants to hunt, Jon thought . Perhaps there were goats in these mountains . The shadowcats must live on something . Just don ' t try and bring down a ' cat, he muttered . Even for a direwolf, that would be dangerous . He tugged his cloak over him and stretched out beneath the rock. When he closed his eyes, he dreamed of direwolves. There were five of them when there should have been six, and they were scattered, each apart from the others . He felt a deep ache of emptiness, a sense of incompleteness . The forest was vast and cold, and they were so small, so lost . His brothers were out there somewhere, and his sister, but he had lost their scent . He sat on his haunches and lifted his head to the darkening sky, and his cry echoed through the forest, a long lonely mournful sound . As it died away, he pricked up his ears, listening for an answer, but the only sound was the sigh of blowing snow. The call came from behind him, softer than a whisper, but strong too . Can a shout be silent? He turned his head, searching for his brother, for a glimpse of a lean grey shape moving beneath the trees, but there was nothing, only . . . A weirwood. It seemed to sprout from solid rock, its pale roots twisting up from a myriad of fissures and hairline cracks . The tree was slender compared to other weirwoods he had seen, no more than a sapling, yet it was growing as he watched, its limbs thickening as they reached for the sky . Wary, he circled the smooth white trunk until he came to the face . Red eyes looked at him . Fierce eyes they were, yet glad to see him . The weirwood had his brother ' s face . Had his brother always had three eyes? Not always, came the silent shout . Not before the crow. He sniffed at the bark, smelled wolf and tree and boy, but behind that there were other scents, the rich brown smell of warm earth and the hard grey smell of stone and something else, something terrible . Death, he knew . He was smelling death . He cringed back, his hair bristling, and bared his fangs. Don ' t be afraid, I like it in the dark . No one can see you, but you can see them . But first you have to open your eyes . See? Like this . And the tree reached down and touched him. And suddenly he was back in the mountains, his paws sunk deep in a drift of snow as he stood upon the edge of a great precipice . Before him the Skirling Pass opened up into airy emptiness, and a long vee-shaped valley lay spread beneath him like a quilt, awash in all the colors of an autumn afternoon. A vast blue-white wall plugged one end of the vale, squeezing between the mountains as if it had shouldered them aside, and for a moment he thought he had dreamed himself back to Castle Black . Then he realized he was looking at a river of ice several thousand feet high . Under that glittering cold cliff was a great lake, its deep cobalt waters reflecting the snowcapped peaks that ringed it . There were men down in the valley, he saw now; many men, thousands, a huge host . Some were tearing great holes in the half-frozen ground, while others trained for war . He watched as a swarming mass of riders charged a shield wall, astride horses no larger than ants . The sound of their mock battle was a rustling of steel leaves, drifting faintly on the wind . Their encampment had no plan to it; he saw no ditches, no sharpened stakes, no neat rows of horse lines . Everywhere crude earthen shelters and hide tents sprouted haphazardly, like a pox on the face of the earth . He spied untidy mounds of hay, smelled goats and sheep, horses and pigs, dogs in great profusion . Tendrils of dark smoke rose from a thousand cookfires. This is no army, no more than it is a town . This is a whole people come together. Across the long lake, one of the mounds moved . He watched it more closely and saw that it was not dirt at all, but alive, a shaggy lumbering beast with a snake for a nose and tusks larger than those of the greatest boar that had ever lived . And the thing riding it was huge as well, and his shape was wrong, too thick in the leg and hips to be a man. Then a sudden gust of cold made his fur stand up, and the air thrilled to the sound of wings . As he lifted his eyes to the ice-white mountain heights above, a shadow plummeted out of the sky . A shrill scream split the air . He glimpsed blue-grey pinions spread wide, shutting out the sun . . . Jon shouted, sitting up . He could still feel the talons, the pain [BOS] Ghost! Ghost, to me! [EOS]  Ebben appeared, grabbed him, shook him . " Quiet! You mean to bring the wildlings down on us? What ' s wrong with you, boy? " " A dream, " said Jon feebly . " I was Ghost, I was on the edge of the mountain looking down on a frozen river, and something attacked me . A bird . . . an eagle, I think . . . " Squire Dalbridge smiled . " It ' s always pretty women in my dreams . Would that I dreamed more often . " Qhorin came up beside him . " A frozen river, you say? " " The Milkwater flows from a great lake at the foot of a glacier, " Stonesnake put in. " There was a tree with my brother ' s face . The wildlings . . . there were thousands, more than I ever knew existed . And giants riding mammoths . " From the way the light had shifted, Jon judged that he had been asleep for four or five hours . His head ached, and the back of his neck where the talons had burned through him . But that was in the dream. " Tell me all that you remember, from first to last, " said Qhorin Halfhand. Jon was confused [BOS] It was only a dream . [EOS]  " A wolf dream, " the Halfhand said . " Craster told the Lord Commander that the wildlings were gathering at the source of the Milkwater . That may be why you dreamed it . Or it may be that you saw what waits for us, a few hours farther on . Tell me . " It made him feel half a fool to talk of such things to Qhorin and the other rangers, but he did as he was commanded . None of the black brothers laughed at him, however . By the time he was done, even Squire Dalbridge was no longer smiling. " Skinchanger? " said Ebben grimly, looking at the Halfhand . Does he mean the eagle? Jon wondered . Or me? Skinchangers and wargs belonged in Old Nan ' s stories, not in the world he had lived in all his life . Yet here, in this strange bleak wilderness of rock and ice, it was not hard to believe. " The cold winds are rising . Mormont feared as much . Benjen Stark felt it as well . Dead men walk and the trees have eyes again . Why should we balk at wargs and giants? " " Does this mean my dreams are true as well? " asked Squire Dalbridge . " Lord Snow can keep his mammoths, I want my women . " " Man and boy I ' ve served the Watch, and ranged as far as any, " said Ebben . " I ' ve seen the bones of giants, and heard many a queer tale, but no more . I want to see them with my own eyes . " " Be careful they don ' t see you, Ebben, " Stonesnake said. Ghost did not reappear as they set out again . The shadows covered the floor of the pass by then, and the sun was sinking fast toward the jagged twin peaks of the huge mountain the rangers named Forktop . If the dream was true . . . Even the thought scared him . Could the eagle have hurt Ghost, or knocked him off the precipice? And what about the weirwood with his brother ' s face, that smelled of death and darkness? The last ray of sun vanished behind the peaks of Forktop . Twilight filled the Skirling Pass . It seemed to grow colder almost at once . They were no longer climbing . In fact, the ground had begun to descend, though as yet not sharply . It was littered with cracks and broken boulders and tumbled heaps of rock . It will be dark soon, and still no sight of Ghost . It was tearing Jon apart, yet he dare not shout for the direwolf as he would have liked . Other things might be listening as well. " Qhorin, " Squire Dalbridge called softly . " There . Look . " The eagle was perched on a spine of rock far above them, outlined against the darkening sky . We ' ve seen other eagles, Jon thought . That need not be the one I dreamed of. Even so, Ebben would have loosed a shaft at it, but the squire stopped him . " The bird ' s well out of bowshot . " " I don ' t like it watching us . " The squire shrugged . " Nor me, but you won ' t stop it . Only waste a good arrow . " Qhorin sat in his saddle, studying the eagle for a long time . " We press on, " he finally said . The rangers resumed their descent. Ghost, Jon wanted to shout, where are you? He was about to follow Qhorin and the others when he glimpsed a flash of white between two boulders . A patch of old snow, he thought, until he saw it stir . He was off his horse at once . As he went to his knees, Ghost lifted his head . His neck glistened wetly, but he made no sound when Jon peeled off a glove and touched him . The talons had torn a bloody path through fur and flesh, but the bird had not been able to snap his neck. Qhorin Halfhand was standing over him . " How bad? " As if in answer, Ghost struggled to his feet. " The wolf is strong, " the ranger said . " Ebben, water . Stonesnake, your skin of wine . Hold him still, Jon . " Together they washed the caked blood from the direwolf ' s fur . Ghost struggled and bared his teeth when Qhorin poured the wine into the ragged red gashes the eagle had left him, but Jon wrapped his arms around him and murmured soothing words, and soon enough the wolf quieted . By the time they ' d ripped a strip from Jon ' s cloak to wrap the wounds, full dark had settled . Only a dusting of stars set the black of sky apart from the black of stone . " Do we press on? " Stonesnake wanted to know. Qhorin went to his garron . " Back, not on . " " Back? " Jon was taken by surprise. " Eagles have sharper eyes than men . We are seen . So now we run . " The Halfhand wound a long black scarf around his face and swung up into the saddle. The other rangers exchanged a look, but no man thought to argue . One by one they mounted and turned their mounts toward home . " Ghost, come, " he called, and the direwolf followed, a pale shadow moving through the night. All night they rode, feeling their way up the twisting pass and through the stretches of broken ground . The wind grew stronger . Sometimes it was so dark that they dismounted and went ahead on foot, each man leading his garron . Once Ebben suggested that some torches might serve them well, but Qhorin said, " No fire, " and that was the end of that . They reached the stone bridge at the summit and began to descend again . Off in the darkness a shadowcat screamed in fury, its voice bouncing off the rocks so it seemed as though a dozen other ' cats were giving answer . Once Jon thought he saw a pair of glowing eyes on a ledge overhead, as big as harvest moons. In the black hour before dawn, they stopped to let the horses drink and fed them each a handful of oats and a twist or two of hay . " We are not far from the place the wildlings died, " said Qhorin . " From there, one man could hold a hundred . The right man . " He looked at Squire Dalbridge. The squire bowed his head . " Leave me as many arrows as you can spare, brothers . " He stroked his longbow . " And see my garron has an apple when you ' re home . He ' s earned it, poor beastie . " He ' s staying to die, Jon realized. Qhorin clasped the squire ' s forearm with a gloved hand . " If the eagle flies down for a look at you . . . " " . . . he ' ll sprout some new feathers . " The last Jon saw of Squire Dalbridge was his back as he clambered up the narrow path to the heights. When dawn broke, Jon looked up into a cloudless sky and saw a speck moving through the blue . Ebben saw it too, and cursed, but Qhorin told him to be quiet . " Listen . " Jon held his breath, and heard it . Far away and behind them, the call of a hunting horn echoed against the mountains. " And now they come, " said Qhorin. When Qhorin Halfhand told him to find some brush for a fire, Jon knew their end was near. It will be good to feel warm again, if only for a little while, he told himself while he hacked bare branches from the trunk of a dead tree . Ghost sat on his haunches watching, silent as ever . Will he howl for me when I ' m dead, as Bran ' s wolf howled when he fell? Jon wondered . Will Shaggydog howl, far off in Winterfell, and Grey Wind and Nymeria, wherever they might be? The moon was rising behind one mountain and the sun sinking behind another as Jon struck sparks from flint and dagger, until finally a wisp of smoke appeared . Qhorin came and stood over him as the first flame rose up flickering from the shavings of bark and dead dry pine needles . " As shy as a maid on her wedding night, " the big ranger said in a soft voice, " and near as fair . Sometimes a man forgets how pretty a fire can be . " He was not a man you ' d expect to speak of maids and wedding nights . So far as Jon knew, Qhorin had spent his whole life in the Watch . Did he ever love a maid or have a wedding? He could not ask . Instead he fanned the fire . When the blaze was all acrackle, he peeled off his stiff gloves to warm his hands, and sighed, wondering if ever a kiss had felt as good . The warmth spread through his fingers like melting butter. The Halfhand eased himself to the ground and sat cross-legged by the fire, the flickering light playing across the hard planes of his face . Only the two of them remained of the five rangers who had fled the Skirling Pass, back into the blue-grey wilderness of the Frostfangs. At first Jon had nursed the hope that Squire Dalbridge would keep the wildlings bottled up in the pass . But when they ' d heard the call of a far-off horn every man of them knew the squire had fallen . Later they spied the eagle soaring through the dusk on great blue-grey wings and Stonesnake unslung his bow, but the bird flew out of range before he could so much as string it . Ebben spat and muttered darkly of wargs and skinchangers. They glimpsed the eagle twice more the day after, and heard the hunting horn behind them echoing against the mountains . Each time it seemed a little louder, a little closer . When night fell, the Halfhand told Ebben to take the squire ' s garron as well as his own, and ride east for Mormont with all haste, back the way they had come . The rest of them would draw off the pursuit . " Send Jon, " Ebben had urged . " He can ride as fast as me . " " Jon has a different part to play . " " He is half a boy still . " " No, " said Qhorin, " he is a man of the Night ' s Watch . " When the moon rose, Ebben parted from them . Stonesnake went east with him a short way, then doubled back to obscure their tracks, and the three who remained set off toward the southwest. After that the days and nights blurred one into the other . They slept in their saddles and stopped only long enough to feed and water the garrons, then mounted up again . Over bare rock they rode, through gloomy pine forests and drifts of old snow, over icy ridges and across shallow rivers that had no names . Sometimes Qhorin or Stonesnake would loop back to sweep away their tracks, but it was a futile gesture . They were watched . At every dawn and every dusk they saw the eagle soaring between the peaks, no more than a speck in the vastness of the sky. They were scaling a low ridge between two snowcapped peaks when a shadowcat came snarling from its lair, not ten yards away . The beast was gaunt and half-starved, but the sight of it sent Stonesnake ' s mare into a panic; she reared and ran, and before the ranger could get her back under control she had stumbled on the steep slope and broken a leg. Ghost ate well that day, and Qhorin insisted that the rangers mix some of the garron ' s blood with their oats, to give them strength . The taste of that foul porridge almost choked Jon, but he forced it down . They each cut a dozen strips of raw stringy meat from the carcass to chew on as they rode, and left the rest for the shadowcats. There was no question of riding double . Stonesnake offered to lay in wait for the pursuit and surprise them when they came . Perhaps he could take a few of them with him down to hell . Qhorin refused . " If any man in the Night ' s Watch can make it through the Frostfangs alone and afoot, it is you, brother . You can go over mountains that a horse must go around . Make for the Fist . Tell Mormont what Jon saw, and how . Tell him that the old powers are waking, that he faces giants and wargs and worse . Tell him that the trees have eyes again . " He has no chance, Jon thought when he watched Stonesnake vanish over a snow-covered ridge, a tiny black bug crawling across a rippling expanse of white. After that, every night seemed colder than the night before, and more lonely . Ghost was not always with them, but he was never far either . Even when they were apart, Jon sensed his nearness . He was glad for that . The Halfhand was not the most companionable of men . Qhorin ' s long grey braid swung slowly with the motion of his horse . Often they would ride for hours without a word spoken, the only sounds the soft scrape of horseshoes on stone and the keening of the wind, which blew endlessly through the heights . When he slept, he did not dream; not of wolves, nor his brothers, nor anything . Even dreams cannot live up here, he told himself. " Is your sword sharp, Jon Snow? " asked Qhorin Halfhand across the flickering fire. " My sword is Valyrian steel . The Old Bear gave it to me . " " Do you remember the words of your vow? " " Yes . " They were not words a man was like to forget . Once said, they could never be unsaid . They changed your life forever. " Say them again with me, Jon Snow . " " If you like . " Their voices blended as one beneath the rising moon, while Ghost listened and the mountains themselves bore witness . " Night gathers, and now my watch begins . It shall not end until my death . I shall take no wife, hold no lands, father no children . I shall wear no crowns and win no glory . I shall live and die at my post . I am the sword in the darkness . I am the watcher on the walls . I am the fire that burns against the cold, the light that brings the dawn, the horn that wakes the sleepers, the shield that guards the realms of men . I pledge my life and honor to the Night ' s Watch, for this night and all the nights to come . " When they were done, there was no sound but the faint crackle of the flames and a distant sigh of wind . Jon opened and closed his burnt fingers, holding tight to the words in his mind, praying that his father ' s gods would give him the strength to die bravely when his hour came . It would not be long now . The garrons were near the end of their strength . Qhorin ' s mount would not last another day, Jon suspected. The flames were burning low by then, the warmth fading . " The fire will soon go out, " Qhorin said, " but if the Wall should ever fall, all the fires will go out . " There was nothing Jon could say to that . He nodded. " We may escape them yet, " the ranger said . " Or not . " " I ' m not afraid to die . " It was only half a lie. " It may not be so easy as that, Jon . " He did not understand . " What do you mean? " " If we are taken, you must yield . " " Yield? " He blinked in disbelief . The wildlings did not make captives of the men they called the crows . They killed them, except for . . . " They only spare oathbreakers . Those who join them, like Mance Rayder . " " And you . " " No . " He shook his head . " Never . I won ' t . " " You will . I command it of you . " " Command it? But . . . " " Our honor means no more than our lives, so long as the realm is safe . Are you a man of the Night ' s Watch? " " Yes, but— " " There is no but, Jon Snow . You are, or you are not . " Jon sat up straight [BOS] I am . [EOS]  " Then hear me . If we are taken, you will go over to them, as the wildling girl you captured once urged you . They may demand that you cut your cloak to ribbons, that you swear them an oath on your father ' s grave, that you curse your brothers and your Lord Commander . You must not balk, whatever is asked of you . Do as they bid you . . . but in your heart, remember who and what you are . Ride with them, eat with them, fight with them, for as long as it takes . And watch . " Jon asked [BOS] For what? [EOS]  " Would that I knew, " said Qhorin . " Your wolf saw their diggings in the valley of the Milkwater . What did they seek, in such a bleak and distant place? Did they find it? That is what you must learn, before you return to Lord Mormont and your brothers . That is the duty I lay on you, Jon Snow . " Jon said reluctantly, [BOS] I ' ll do as you say, but . . . you will tell them, won ' t you? The Old Bear, at least? You ' ll tell him that I never broke my oath . [EOS]  Qhorin Halfhand gazed at him across the fire, his eyes lost in pools of shadow . " When I see him next . I swear it . " He gestured at the fire . " More wood . I want it bright and hot . " Jon went to cut more branches, snapping each one in two before tossing it into the flames . The tree had been dead a long time, but it seemed to live again in the fire, as fiery dancers woke within each stick of wood to whirl and spin in their glowing gowns of yellow, red, and orange. " Enough, " Qhorin said abruptly . " Now we ride . " " Ride? " It was dark beyond the fire, and the night was cold . " Ride where? " " Back . " Qhorin mounted his weary garron one more time . " The fire will draw them past, I hope . Come, brother . " Jon pulled on his gloves again and raised his hood . Even the horses seemed reluctant to leave the fire . The sun was long gone, and only the cold silver shine of the half-moon remained to light their way over the treacherous ground that lay behind them . He did not know what Qhorin had in mind, but perhaps it was a chance . He hoped so . I do not want to play the oathbreaker, even for good reason. They went cautiously, moving as silent as man and horse could move, retracing their steps until they reached the mouth of a narrow defile where an icy little stream emerged from between two mountains . Jon remembered the place . They had watered the horses here before the sun went down. " The water ' s icing up, " Qhorin observed as he turned aside, " else we ' d ride in the streambed . But if we break the ice, they are like to see . Keep close to the cliffs . There ' s a crook a half mile on that will hide us . " He rode into the defile . Jon gave one last wistful look to their distant fire, and followed. The farther in they went, the closer the cliffs pressed to either side . They followed the moonlit ribbon of stream back toward its source . Icicles bearded its stony banks, but Jon could still hear the sound of rushing water beneath the thin hard crust. A great jumble of fallen rock blocked their way partway up, where a section of the cliff face had fallen, but the surefooted little garrons were able to pick their way through . Beyond, the walls pinched in sharply, and the stream led them to the foot of a tall twisting waterfall . The air was full of mist, like the breath of some vast cold beast . The tumbling waters shone silver in the moonlight . Jon looked about in dismay . There is no way out . He and Qhorin might be able to climb the cliffs, but not with the horses . He did not think they would last long afoot. " Quickly now, " the Halfhand commanded . The big man on the small horse rode over the ice-slick stones, right into the curtain of water, and vanished . When he did not reappear, Jon put his heels into his horse and went after . His garron did his best to shy away . The falling water slapped at them with frozen fists, and the shock of the cold seemed to stop Jon ' s breath. Then he was through; drenched and shivering, but through. The cleft in the rock was barely large enough for man and horse to pass, but beyond, the walls opened up and the floor turned to soft sand . Jon could feel the spray freezing in his beard . Ghost burst through the waterfall in an angry rush, shook droplets from his fur, sniffed at the darkness suspiciously, then lifted a leg against one rocky wall . Qhorin had already dismounted . Jon did the same . " You knew this place was here . " " When I was no older than you, I heard a brother tell how he followed a shadowcat through these falls . " He unsaddled his horse, removed her bit and bridle, and ran his fingers through her shaggy mane . " There is a way through the heart of the mountain . Come dawn, if they have not found us, we will press on . The first watch is mine, brother . " Qhorin seated himself on the sand, his back to a wall, no more than a vague black shadow in the gloom of the cave . Over the rush of falling waters, Jon heard a soft sound of steel on leather that could only mean that the Halfhand had drawn his sword. He took off his wet cloak, but it was too cold and damp here to strip down any further . Ghost stretched out beside him and licked his glove before curling up to sleep . Jon was grateful for his warmth . He wondered if the fire was still burning outside, or if it had gone out by now . If the Wall should ever fall, all the fires will go out . The moon shone through the curtain of falling water to lay a shimmering pale stripe across the sand, but after a time that too faded and went dark. Sleep came at last, and with it nightmares . He dreamed of burning castles and dead men rising unquiet from their graves . It was still dark when Qhorin woke him . While the Halfhand slept, Jon sat with his back to the cave wall, listening to the water and waiting for the dawn. At break of day, they each chewed a half-frozen strip of horsemeat, then saddled their garrons once again, and fastened their black cloaks around their shoulders . During his watch the Halfhand had made a half-dozen torches, soaking bundles of dry moss with the oil he carried in his saddlebag . He lit the first one now and led the way down into the dark, holding the pale flame up before him . Jon followed with the horses . The stony path twisted and turned, first down, then up, then down more steeply . In spots it grew so narrow it was hard to convince the garrons they could squeeze through . By the time we come out we will have lost them, he told himself as they went . Not even an eagle can see through solid stone . We will have lost them, and we will ride hard for the Fist, and tell the Old Bear all we know. But when they emerged back into the light long hours later, the eagle was waiting for them, perched on a dead tree a hundred feet up the slope . Ghost went bounding up the rocks after it, but the bird flapped its wings and took to the air. Qhorin ' s mouth tightened as he followed its flight with his eyes . " Here is as good a place as any to make a stand, " he declared . " The mouth of the cave shelters us from above, and they cannot get behind us without passing through the mountain . Is your sword sharp, Jon Snow? " " Yes, " he said. " We ' ll feed the horses . They ' ve served us bravely, poor beasts . " Jon gave his garron the last of the oats and stroked his shaggy mane while Ghost prowled restlessly amongst the rocks . He pulled his gloves on tighter and flexed his burnt fingers . I am the shield that guards the realms of men. A hunting horn echoed through the mountains, and a moment later Jon heard the baying of hounds . " They will be with us soon, " announced Qhorin . " Keep your wolf in hand . " Jon called . The direwolf returned reluctantly to his side, tail held stiffly behind him [BOS] Ghost, to me, [EOS]  The wildlings came boiling over a ridge not half a mile away . Their hounds ran before them, snarling grey-brown beasts with more than a little wolf in their blood . Ghost bared his teeth, his fur bristling . Jon murmured [BOS] Easy, Stay . [EOS] Overhead he heard a rustle of wings . The eagle landed on an outcrop of rock and screamed in triumph. The hunters approached warily, perhaps fearing arrows . Jon counted fourteen, with eight dogs . Their large round shields were made of skins stretched over woven wicker and painted with skulls . About half of them hid their faces behind crude helms of wood and boiled leather . On either wing, archers notched shafts to the strings of small wood-and-horn bows, but did not loose . The rest seemed to be armed with spears and mauls . One had a chipped stone axe . They wore only what bits of armor they had looted from dead rangers or stolen during raids . Wildlings did not mine or smelt, and there were few smiths and fewer forges north of the Wall. Qhorin drew his longsword . The tale of how he had taught himself to fight with his left hand after losing half of his right was part of his legend; it was said that he handled a blade better now than he ever had before . Jon stood shoulder to shoulder with the big ranger and pulled Longclaw from its sheath . Despite the chill in the air, sweat stung his eyes. Ten yards below the cave mouth the hunters halted . Their leader came on alone, riding a beast that seemed more goat than horse, from the surefooted way it climbed the uneven slope . As man and mount grew nearer Jon could hear them clattering; both were armored in bones . Cow bones, sheep bones, the bones of goats and aurochs and elk, the great bones of the hairy mammoths . . . and human bones as well. " Rattleshirt, " Qhorin called down, icy-polite. " To crows I be the Lord o ' Bones . " The rider ' s helm was made from the broken skull of a giant, and all up and down his arms bearclaws had been sewn to his boiled leather. Qhorin snorted . " I see no lord . Only a dog dressed in chickenbones, who rattles when he rides . " The wildling hissed in anger, and his mount reared . He did rattle, Jon could hear it; the bones were strung together loosely, so they clacked and clattered when he moved . " It ' s your bones I ' ll be rattling soon, Halfhand . I ' ll boil the flesh off you and make a byrnie from your ribs . I ' ll carve your teeth to cast me runes, and eat me oaten porridge from your skull . " " If you want my bones, come get them . " That, Rattleshirt seemed reluctant to do . His numbers meant little in the close confines of the rocks where the black brothers had taken their stand; to winkle them out of the cave the wildlings would need to come up two at a time . But another of his company edged a horse up beside him, one of the fighting women called spearwives . " We are four-and-ten to two, crows, and eight dogs to your wolf, " she called . " Fight or run, you are ours . " " Show them, " commanded Rattleshirt. The woman reached into a bloodstained sack and drew out a trophy . Ebben had been bald as an egg, so she dangled the head by an ear . " He died brave, " she said. But he died, said Rattleshirt, same like you . He freed his battle-axe, brandishing it above his head . Good steel it was, with a wicked gleam to both blades; Ebben was never a man to neglect his weapons . The other wildlings crowded forward beside him, yelling taunts . A few chose Jon for their mockery . Is that your wolf, boy? a skinny youth called, unlimbering a stone flail . He ' ll be my cloak before the sun is down . On the other side of the line, another spearwife opened her ragged furs to show Jon a heavy white breast . Does the baby want his momma? Come, have a suck o ' this, boy . The dogs were barking too. " They would shame us into folly . " Qhorin gave Jon a long look . " Remember your orders . " " Belike we need to flush the crows, " Rattleshirt bellowed over the clamor . " Feather them! " " No! " The word burst from Jon ' s lips before the bowmen could loose . He took two quick steps forward . " We yield! " " They warned me bastard blood was craven, " he heard Qhorin Halfhand say coldly behind him . " I see it is so . Run to your new masters, coward . " Face reddening, Jon descended the slope to where Rattleshirt sat his horse . The wildling stared at him through the eyeholes of his helm, and said, " The free folk have no need of cravens . " " He is no craven . " One of the archers pulled off her sewn sheepskin helm and shook out a head of shaggy red hair . " This is the Bastard o ' Winterfell, who spared me . Let him live . " Jon met Ygritte ' s eyes, and had no words. " Let him die, " insisted the Lord of Bones . " The black crow is a tricksy bird . I trust him not . " On a rock above them, the eagle flapped its wings and split the air with a scream of fury. " The bird hates you, Jon Snow, " said Ygritte . " And well he might . He was a man, before you killed him . " " I did not know, " said Jon truthfully, trying to remember the face of the man he had slain in the pass . " You told me Mance would take me . " " And he will, " Ygritte said. " Mance is not here, " said Rattleshirt . " Ragwyle, gut him . " The big spearwife narrowed her eyes and said, " If the crow would join the free folk, let him show us his prowess and prove the truth of him . " " I ' ll do whatever you ask . " The words came hard, but Jon said them. Rattleshirt ' s bone armor clattered loudly as he laughed . " Then kill the Halfhand, bastard . " " As if he could, " said Qhorin . " Turn, Snow, and die . " And then Qhorin ' s sword was coming at him and somehow Longclaw leapt upward to block . The force of impact almost knocked the bastard blade from Jon ' s hand, and sent him staggering backward . You must not balk, whatever is asked of you . He shifted to a two-hand grip, quick enough to deliver a stroke of his own, but the big ranger brushed it aside with contemptuous ease . Back and forth they went, black cloaks swirling, the youth ' s quickness against the savage strength of Qhorin ' s left-hand cuts . The Halfhand ' s longsword seemed to be everywhere at once, raining down from one side and then the other, driving him where he would, keeping him off balance . Already he could feel his arms growing numb. Even when Ghost ' s teeth closed savagely around the ranger ' s calf, somehow Qhorin kept his feet . But in that instant, as he twisted, the opening was there . Jon planted and pivoted . The ranger was leaning away, and for an instant it seemed that Jon ' s slash had not touched him . Then a string of red tears appeared across the big man ' s throat, bright as a ruby necklace, and the blood gushed out of him, and Qhorin Halfhand fell. Ghost ' s muzzle was dripping red, but only the point of the bastard blade was stained, the last half inch . Jon pulled the direwolf away and knelt with one arm around him . The light was already fading in Qhorin ' s eyes . " . . . sharp, " he said, lifting his maimed fingers . Then his hand fell, and he was gone. He knew, he thought numbly . He knew what they would ask of me . He thought of Samwell Tarly then, of Grenn and Dolorous Edd, of Pyp and Toad back at Castle Black . Had he lost them all, as he had lost Bran and Rickon and Robb? Who was he now? What was he? " Get him up . " Rough hands dragged him to his feet . Jon did not resist . " Do you have a name? " Ygritte answered for him . " His name is Jon Snow . He is Eddard Stark ' s blood, of Winterfell . " Ragwyle laughed . " Who would have thought it? Qhorin Halfhand slain by some lordling ' s byblow . " " Gut him . " That was Rattleshirt, still ahorse . The eagle flew to him and perched atop his bony helm, screeching. " He yielded, " Ygritte reminded them. " Aye, and slew his brother, " said a short homely man in a rust-eaten iron halfhelm. Rattleshirt rode closer, bones clattering . " The wolf did his work for him . It were foully done . The Halfhand ' s death was mine . " " We all saw how eager you were to take it, " mocked Ragwyle. " He is a warg, " said the Lord of Bones, " and a crow . I like him not . " " A warg he may be, " Ygritte said, " but that has never frightened us . " Others shouted agreement . Behind the eyeholes of his yellowed skull Rattleshirt ' s stare was malignant, but he yielded grudgingly . These are a free folk indeed, thought Jon. They burned Qhorin Halfhand where he ' d fallen, on a pyre made of pine needles, brush, and broken branches . Some of the wood was still green, and it burned slow and smoky, sending a black plume up into the bright hard blue of the sky . Afterward Rattleshirt claimed some charred bones, while the others threw dice for the ranger ' s gear . Ygritte won his cloak. Jon asked her . He did not know if he could face those heights again, or if his garron could survive a second crossing [BOS] Will we return by the Skirling Pass? [EOS]  No, she said . There ' s nothing behind us . The look she gave him was sad . By now Mance is well down the Milkwater, marching on your Wall. The world was grey darkness, smelling of pine and moss and cold . Pale mists rose from the black earth as the riders threaded their way through the scatter of stones and scraggly trees, down toward the welcoming fires strewn like jewels across the floor of the river valley below . There were more fires than Jon Snow could count, hundreds of fires, thousands, a second river of flickery lights along the banks of the icy white Milkwater . The fingers of his sword hand opened and closed. They descended the ridge without banners or trumpets, the quiet broken only by the distant murmur of the river, the clop of hooves, and the clacking of Rattleshirt ' s bone armor . Somewhere above an eagle soared on great blue-grey wings, while below came men and dogs and horses and one white direwolf. A stone bounced down the slope, disturbed by a passing hoof, and Jon saw Ghost turn his head at the sudden sound . He had followed the riders at a distance all day, as was his custom, but when the moon rose over the soldier pines he ' d come bounding up, red eyes aglow . Rattleshirt ' s dogs greeted him with a chorus of snarls and growls and wild barking, as ever, but the direwolf paid them no mind . Six days ago, the largest hound had attacked him from behind as the wildlings camped for the night, but Ghost had turned and lunged, sending the dog fleeing with a bloody haunch . The rest of the pack maintained a healthy distance after that. Jon Snow ' s garron whickered softly, but a touch and a soft word soon quieted the animal . Would that his own fears could be calmed so easily . He was all in black, the black of the Night ' s Watch, but the enemy rode before and behind . Wildlings, and I am with them . Ygritte wore the cloak of Qhorin Halfhand . Lenyl had his hauberk, the big spearwife Ragwyle his gloves, one of the bowmen his boots . Qhorin ' s helm had been won by the short homely man called Longspear Ryk, but it fit poorly on his narrow head, so he ' d given that to Ygritte as well . And Rattleshirt had Qhorin ' s bones in his bag, along with the bloody head of Ebben, who set out with Jon to scout the Skirling Pass . Dead, all dead but me, and I am dead to the world. Ygritte rode just behind him . In front was Longspear Ryk . The Lord of Bones had made the two of them his guards . " If the crow flies, I ' ll boil your bones as well, " he warned them when they had set out, smiling through the crooked teeth of the giant ' s skull he wore for a helm. Ygritte hooted at him . " You want to guard him? If you want us to do it, leave us be and we ' ll do it . " These are a free folk indeed, Jon saw . Rattleshirt might lead them, but none of them were shy in talking back to him. The wildling leader fixed him with an unfriendly stare . " Might be you fooled these others, crow, but don ' t think you ' ll be fooling Mance . He ' ll take one look a ' you and know you ' re false . And when he does, I ' ll make a cloak o ' your wolf there, and open your soft boy ' s belly and sew a weasel up inside . " Jon ' s sword hand opened and closed, flexing the burned fingers beneath the glove, but Longspear Ryk only laughed [BOS] And where would you find a weasel in the snow? [EOS]  That first night, after a long day ahorse, they made camp in a shallow stone bowl atop a nameless mountain, huddling close to the fire while the snow began to fall . Jon watched the flakes melt as they drifted over the flames . Despite his layers of wool and fur and leather, he ' d felt cold to the bone . Ygritte sat beside him after she had eaten, her hood pulled up and her hands tucked into her sleeves for warmth . " When Mance hears how you did for Halfhand, he ' ll take you quick enough, " she told him. " Take me for what? " The girl laughed scornfully . " For one o ' us . D ' ya think you ' re the first crow ever flew down off the Wall? In your hearts you all want to fly free . " " And when I ' m free, " he said slowly, " will I be free to go? " Sure you will . She had a warm smile, despite her crooked teeth . And we ' ll be free to kill you . It ' s dangerous being free, but most come to like the taste o ' it . She put her gloved hand on his leg, just above the knee . You ' ll see. I will, thought Jon . I will see, and hear, and learn, and when I have I will carry the word back to the Wall . The wildlings had taken him for an oathbreaker, but in his heart he was still a man of the Night ' s Watch, doing the last duty that Qhorin Halfhand had laid on him . Before I killed him. At the bottom of the slope they came upon a little stream flowing down from the foothills to join the Milkwater . It looked all stones and glass, though they could hear the sound of water running beneath the frozen surface . Rattleshirt led them across, shattering the thin crust of ice. Mance Rayder ' s outriders closed in as they emerged . Jon took their measure with a glance: eight riders, men and women both, clad in fur and boiled leather, with here and there a helm or bit of mail . They were armed with spears and fire-hardened lances, all but their leader, a fleshy blond man with watery eyes who bore a great curved scythe of sharpened steel . The Weeper, he knew at once . The black brothers told tales of this one . Like Rattleshirt and Harma Dogshead and Alfyn Crowkiller, he was a known raider. " The Lord o ' Bones, " the Weeper said when he saw them . He eyed Jon and his wolf . " Who ' s this, then? " " A crow come over, " said Rattleshirt, who preferred to be called the Lord of Bones, for the clattering armor he wore . " He was afraid I ' d take his bones as well as Halfhand ' s. " He shook his sack of trophies at the other wildlings. " He slew Qhorin Halfhand, " said Longspear Ryk . " Him and that wolf o ' his . " " And did for Orell too, " said Rattleshirt. " The lad ' s a warg, or close enough, " put in Ragwyle, the big spearwife . " His wolf took a piece o ' Halfhand ' s leg . " The Weeper ' s red rheumy eyes gave Jon another look . " Aye? Well, he has a wolfish cast to him, now as I look close . Bring him to Mance, might be he ' ll keep him . " He wheeled his horse around and galloped off, his riders hard behind him. The wind was blowing wet and heavy as they crossed the valley of the Milkwater and rode singlefile through the river camp . Ghost kept close to Jon, but the scent of him went before them like a herald, and soon there were wildling dogs all around them, growling and barking . Lenyl screamed at them to be quiet, but they paid him no heed . " They don ' t much care for that beast o ' yours, " Longspear Ryk said to Jon. They ' re dogs and he ' s a wolf, said Jon . They know he ' s not their kind . No more than I am yours . But he had his duty to be mindful of, the task Qhorin Halfhand had laid upon him as they shared that final fire—to play the part of turncloak, and find whatever it was that the wildlings had been seeking in the bleak cold wilderness of the Frostfangs . Some power, Qhorin had named it to the Old Bear, but he had died before learning what it was, or whether Mance Rayder had found it with his digging. There were cookfires all along the river, amongst wayns and carts and sleds . Many of the wildlings had thrown up tents, of hide and skin and felted wool . Others sheltered behind rocks in crude lean-tos, or slept beneath their wagons . At one fire Jon saw a man hardening the points of long wooden spears and tossing them in a pile . Elsewhere two bearded youths in boiled leather were sparring with staffs, leaping at each other over the flames, grunting each time one landed a blow . A dozen women sat nearby in a circle, fletching arrows. Arrows for my brothers, Jon thought . Arrows for my father ' s folk, for the people of Winterfell and Deepwood Motte and the Last Hearth . Arrows for the north. But not all he saw was warlike . He saw women dancing as well, and heard a baby crying, and a little boy ran in front of his garron, all bundled up in fur and breathless from play . Sheep and goats wandered freely, while oxen plodded along the riverbank in search of grass . The smell of roast mutton drifted from one cookfire, and at another he saw a boar turning on a wooden spit. In an open space surrounded by tall green soldier pines, Rattleshirt dismounted . " We ' ll make camp here, " he told Lenyl and Ragwyle and the others . " Feed the horses, then the dogs, then yourself . Ygritte, Longspear, bring the crow so Mance can have his look . We ' ll gut him after . " They walked the rest of the way, past more cookfires and more tents, with Ghost following at their heels . Jon had never seen so many wildlings . He wondered if anyone ever had . The camp goes on forever, he reflected, but it ' s more a hundred camps than one, and each more vulnerable than the last . Stretched out over long leagues, the wildlings had no defenses to speak of, no pits nor sharpened stakes, only small groups of outriders patrolling their perimeters . Each group or clan or village had simply stopped where they wanted, as soon as they saw others stopping or found a likely spot . The free folk . If his brothers were to catch them in such disarray, many of them would pay for that freedom with their life ' s blood . They had numbers, but the Night ' s Watch had discipline, and in battle discipline beats numbers nine times of every ten, his father had once told him. There was no doubting which tent was the king ' s . It was thrice the size of the next largest he ' d seen, and he could hear music drifting from within . Like many of the lesser tents it was made of sewn hides with the fur still on, but Mance Rayder ' s hides were the shaggy white pelts of snow bears . The peaked roof was crowned with a huge set of antlers from one of the giant elks that had once roamed freely throughout the Seven Kingdoms, in the times of the First Men. Here at least they found defenders; two guards at the flap of the tent, leaning on tall spears with round leather shields strapped to their arms . When they caught sight of Ghost, one of them lowered his spearpoint and said, " That beast stays here . " Jon commanded . The direwolf sat [BOS] Ghost, stay, [EOS]  " Longspear, watch the beast . " Rattleshirt yanked open the tent and gestured Jon and Ygritte inside. The tent was hot and smoky . Baskets of burning peat stood in all four corners, filling the air with a dim reddish light . More skins carpeted the ground . Jon felt utterly alone as he stood there in his blacks, awaiting the pleasure of the turncloak who called himself King-beyond-the-Wall . When his eyes had adjusted to the smoky red gloom, he saw six people, none of whom paid him any mind . A dark young man and a pretty blonde woman were sharing a horn of mead . A pregnant woman stood over a brazier cooking a brace of hens, while a grey-haired man in a tattered cloak of black and red sat crosslegged on a pillow, playing a lute and singing: The Dornishman ' s wife was as fair as the sun, and her kisses were warmer than spring. But the Dornishman ' s blade was made of black steel, and its kiss was a terrible thing. Jon knew the song, though it was strange to hear it here, in a shaggy hide tent beyond the Wall, ten thousand leagues from the red mountains and warm winds of Dorne. Rattleshirt took off his yellowed helm as he waited for the song to end . Beneath his bone-and-leather armor he was a small man, and the face under the giant ' s skull was ordinary, with a knobby chin, thin mustache, and sallow, pinched cheeks . His eyes were close-set, one eyebrow creeping all the way across his forehead, dark hair thinning back from a sharp widow ' s peak. The Dornishman ' s wife would sing as she bathed, in a voice that was sweet as a peach, But the Dornishman ' s blade had a song of its own, and a bite sharp and cold as a leech. Beside the brazier, a short but immensely broad man sat on a stool, eating a hen off a skewer . Hot grease was running down his chin and into his snow-white beard, but he smiled happily all the same . Thick gold bands graven with runes bound his massive arms, and he wore a heavy shirt of black ringmail that could only have come from a dead ranger . A few feet away, a taller, leaner man in a leather shirt sewn with bronze scales stood frowning over a map, a two-handed greatsword slung across his back in a leather sheath . He was straight as a spear, all long wiry muscle, clean-shaved, bald, with a strong straight nose and deepset grey eyes . He might even have been comely if he ' d had ears, but he had lost both along the way, whether to frostbite or some enemy ' s knife Jon could not tell . Their lack made the man ' s head seem narrow and pointed. Both the white-bearded man and the bald one were warriors, that was plain to Jon at a glance . These two are more dangerous than Rattleshirt by far . He wondered which was Mance Rayder. As he lay on the ground with the darkness around, and the taste of his blood on his tongue, His brothers knelt by him and prayed him a prayer, and he smiled and he laughed and he sung, Brothers, oh brothers, my days here are done, the Dornishman ' s taken my life, But what does it matter, for all men must die, and I ' ve tasted the Dornishman ' s wife! As the last strains of The Dornishman ' s Wife faded, the bald earless man glanced up from his map and scowled ferociously at Rattleshirt and Ygritte, with Jon between them . What ' s this? he said . A crow? " The black bastard what gutted Orell, " said Rattleshirt, " and a bloody warg as well . " " You were to kill them all . " " This one come over, " explained Ygritte . " He slew Qhorin Halfhand with his own hand . " " This boy? " The earless man was angered by the news . " The Halfhand should have been mine . Do you have a name, crow? " " Jon Snow, Your Grace . " He wondered whether he was expected to bend the knee as well. " Your Grace? " The earless man looked at the big white-bearded one . " You see . He takes me for a king . " The bearded man laughed so hard he sprayed bits of chicken everywhere . He rubbed the grease from his mouth with the back of a huge hand . " A blind boy, must be . Who ever heard of a king without ears? Why, his crown would fall straight down to his neck! Har! " He grinned at Jon, wiping his fingers clean on his breeches . " Close your beak, crow . Spin yourself around, might be you ' d find who you ' re looking for . " Jon turned. The singer rose to his feet . " I ' m Mance Rayder, " he said as he put aside the lute . " And you are Ned Stark ' s bastard, the Snow of Winterfell . " Stunned, Jon stood speechless for a moment, before he recovered enough to say, " How . . . how could you know . . . " " That ' s a tale for later, " said Mance Rayder . " How did you like the song, lad? " " Well enough . I ' d heard it before . " " But what does it matter, for all men must die, " the King-beyond-the-Wall said lightly, " and I ' ve tasted the Dornishman ' s wife . Tell me, does my Lord of Bones speak truly? Did you slay my old friend the Halfhand? " " I did . " Though it was his doing more than mine. " The Shadow Tower will never again seem as fearsome, " the king said with sadness in his voice . " Qhorin was my enemy . But also my brother, once . So . . . shall I thank you for killing him, Jon Snow? Or curse you? " He gave Jon a mocking smile. The King-beyond-the-Wall looked nothing like a king, nor even much a wildling . He was of middling height, slender, sharp-faced, with shrewd brown eyes and long brown hair that had gone mostly to grey . There was no crown on his head, no gold rings on his arms, no jewels at his throat, not even a gleam of silver . He wore wool and leather, and his only garment of note was his ragged black wool cloak, its long tears patched with faded red silk. Jon said finally, [BOS] You ought to thank me for killing your enemy, and curse me for killing your friend . [EOS]  " Har! " boomed the white-bearded man . " Well answered! " Agreed . Mance Rayder beckoned Jon closer . If you would join us, you ' d best know us . The man you took for me is Styr, Magnar of Thenn . Magnar means ‘ lord ' in the Old Tongue . The earless man stared at Jon coldly as Mance turned to the white-bearded one . Our ferocious chicken-eater here is my loyal Tormund . The woman— Tormund rose to his feet . " Hold . You gave Styr his style, give me mine . " Mance Rayder laughed . " As you wish . Jon Snow, before you stands Tormund Giantsbane, Tall-talker, Horn-blower, and Breaker of Ice . And here also Tormund Thunderfist, Husband to Bears, the Mead-king of Ruddy Hall, Speaker to Gods and Father of Hosts . " " That sounds more like me, " said Tormund . " Well met, Jon Snow . I am fond o ' wargs, as it happens, though not o ' Starks . " The good woman at the brazier, Mance Rayder went on, is Dalla . The pregnant woman smiled shyly . Treat her like you would any queen, she is carrying my child . He turned to the last two . This beauty is her sister Val . Young Jarl beside her is her latest pet. " I am no man ' s pet, " said Jarl, dark and fierce. " And Val ' s no man, " white-bearded Tormund snorted . " You ought to have noticed that by now, lad . " " So there you have us, Jon Snow, " said Mance Rayder . " The King-beyond-the-Wall and his court, such as it is . And now some words from you, I think . Where did you come from? " " Winterfell, " he said, " by way of Castle Black . " " And what brings you up the Milkwater, so far from the fires of home? " He did not wait for Jon ' s answer, but looked at once to Rattleshirt . " How many were they? " " Five . Three ' s dead and the boy ' s here . T ' other went up a mountainside where no horse could follow . " Rayder ' s eyes met Jon ' s again . " Was it only the five of you? Or are more of your brothers skulking about? " " We were four and the Halfhand . Qhorin was worth twenty common men . " The King-beyond-the-Wall smiled at that . " Some thought so . Still . . . a boy from Castle Black with rangers from the Shadow Tower? How did that come to be? " Jon had his lie all ready [BOS] The Lord Commander sent me to the Halfhand for seasoning, so he took me on his ranging . [EOS]  Styr the Magnar frowned at that . " Ranging, you call it . . . why would crows come ranging up the Skirling Pass? " Jon said, truthfully [BOS] The villages were deserted, It was as if all the free folk had vanished . [EOS]  " Vanished, aye, " said Mance Rayder . " And not just the free folk . Who told you where we were, Jon Snow? " Tormund snorted . " It were Craster, or I ' m a blushing maid . I told you, Mance, that creature needs to be shorter by a head . " The king gave the older man an irritated look . " Tormund, some day try thinking before you speak . I know it was Craster . I asked Jon to see if he would tell it true . " Har . Tormund spat . Well, I stepped in that! He grinned at Jon . See, lad, that ' s why he ' s king and I ' m not . I can outdrink, outfight, and outsing him, and my member ' s thrice the size o ' his, but Mance has cunning . He was raised a crow, you know, and the crow ' s a tricksy bird. " I would speak with the lad alone, my Lord of Bones, " Mance Rayder said to Rattleshirt . " Leave us, all of you . " " What, me as well? " said Tormund. " No, you especially, " said Mance. I eat in no hall where I ' m not welcome . Tormund got to his feet . Me and the hens are leaving . He snatched another chicken off the brazier, shoved it into a pocket sewn in the lining of his cloak, said Har, and left licking his fingers . The others followed him out, all but the woman Dalla. " Sit, if you like, " Rayder said when they were gone . " Are you hungry? Tormund left us two birds at least . " " I would be pleased to eat, Your Grace . And thank you . " " Your Grace? " The king smiled . " That ' s not a style one often hears from the lips of free folk . I ' m Mance to most, The Mance to some . Will you take a horn of mead? " " Gladly, " said Jon. The king poured himself as Dalla cut the well-crisped hens apart and brought them each a half . Jon peeled off his gloves and ate with his fingers, sucking every morsel of meat off the bones. " Tormund spoke truly, " said Mance Rayder as he ripped apart a loaf of bread . " The black crow is a tricksy bird, that ' s so . . . but I was a crow when you were no bigger than the babe in Dalla ' s belly, Jon Snow . So take care not to play tricksy with me . " " As you say, Your—Mance . " The king laughed . " Your Mance! Why not? I promised you a tale before, of how I knew you . Have you puzzled it out yet? " Jon shook his head [BOS] Did Rattleshirt send word ahead? [EOS]  " By wing? We have no trained ravens . No, I knew your face . I ' ve seen it before . Twice . " It made no sense at first, but as Jon turned it over in his mind, dawn broke . " When you were a brother of the Watch . . . " " Very good! Yes, that was the first time . You were just a boy, and I was all in black, one of a dozen riding escort to old Lord Commander Qorgyle when he came down to see your father at Winterfell . I was walking the wall around the yard when I came on you and your brother Robb . It had snowed the night before, and the two of you had built a great mountain above the gate and were waiting for someone likely to pass underneath . " " I remember, " said Jon with a startled laugh . A young black brother on the wallwalk, yes . . . " You swore not to tell . " " And kept my vow . That one, at least . " " We dumped the snow on Fat Tom . He was Father ' s slowest guardsman . " Tom had chased them around the yard afterward, until all three were red as autumn apples . " But you said you saw me twice . When was the other time? " " When King Robert came to Winterfell to make your father Hand, " the King-beyond-the-Wall said lightly. Jon ' s eyes widened in disbelief [BOS] That can ' t be so . [EOS]  " It was . When your father learned the king was coming, he sent word to his brother Benjen on the Wall, so he might come down for the feast . There is more commerce between the black brothers and the free folk than you know, and soon enough word came to my ears as well . It was too choice a chance to resist . Your uncle did not know me by sight, so I had no fear from that quarter, and I did not think your father was like to remember a young crow he ' d met briefly years before . I wanted to see this Robert with my own eyes, king to king, and get the measure of your uncle Benjen as well . He was First Ranger by then, and the bane of all my people . So I saddled my fleetest horse, and rode . " Jon objected, [BOS] But, the Wall . . . [EOS]  " The Wall can stop an army, but not a man alone . I took a lute and a bag of silver, scaled the ice near Long Barrow, walked a few leagues south of the New Gift, and bought a horse . All in all I made much better time than Robert, who was traveling with a ponderous great wheelhouse to keep his queen in comfort . A day south of Winterfell I came up on him and fell in with his company . Freeriders and hedge knights are always attaching themselves to royal processions, in hopes of finding service with the king, and my lute gained me easy acceptance . " He laughed . " I know every bawdy song that ' s ever been made, north or south of the Wall . So there you are . The night your father feasted Robert, I sat in the back of his hall on a bench with the other freeriders, listening to Orland of Oldtown play the high harp and sing of dead kings beneath the sea . I betook of your lord father ' s meat and mead, had a look at Kingslayer and Imp . . . and made passing note of Lord Eddard ' s children and the wolf pups that ran at their heels . " " Bael the Bard, " said Jon, remembering the tale that Ygritte had told him in the Frostfangs, the night he ' d almost killed her. " Would that I were . I will not deny that Bael ' s exploit inspired mine own . . . but I did not steal either of your sisters that I recall . Bael wrote his own songs, and lived them . I only sing the songs that better men have made . More mead? " " No, " said Jon . " If you had been discovered . . . taken . . . " Your father would have had my head off . The king gave a shrug . Though once I had eaten at his board I was protected by guest right . The laws of hospitality are as old as the First Men, and sacred as a heart tree . He gestured at the board between them, the broken bread and chicken bones . Here you are the guest, and safe from harm at my hands . . . this night, at least . So tell me truly, Jon Snow . Are you a craven who turned your cloak from fear, or is there another reason that brings you to my tent? Guest right or no, Jon Snow knew he walked on rotten ice here . One false step and he might plunge through, into water cold enough to stop his heart . Weigh every word before you speak it, he told himself . He took a long draught of mead to buy time for his answer . When he set the horn aside he said, " Tell me why you turned your cloak, and I ' ll tell you why I turned mine . " Mance Rayder smiled, as Jon had hoped he would . The king was plainly a man who liked the sound of his own voice . " You will have heard stories of my desertion, I have no doubt . " " Some say it was for a crown . Some say for a woman . Others that you had the wildling blood . " " The wildling blood is the blood of the First Men, the same blood that flows in the veins of the Starks . As to a crown, do you see one? " " I see a woman . " He glanced at Dalla. Mance took her by the hand and pulled her close . " My lady is blameless . I met her on my return from your father ' s castle . The Halfhand was carved of old oak, but I am made of flesh, and I have a great fondness for the charms of women . . . which makes me no different from three-quarters of the Watch . There are men still wearing black who have had ten times as many women as this poor king . You must guess again, Jon Snow . " Jon considered a moment [BOS] The Halfhand said you had a passion for wildling music . [EOS]  " I did . I do . That ' s closer to the mark, yes . But not a hit . " Mance Rayder rose, unfastened the clasp that held his cloak, and swept it over the bench . " It was for this . " " A cloak? " The black wool cloak of a Sworn Brother of the Night ' s Watch, said the King-beyond-the-Wall . One day on a ranging we brought down a fine big elk . We were skinning it when the smell of blood drew a shadow-cat out of its lair . I drove it off, but not before it shredded my cloak to ribbons . Do you see? Here, here, and here? He chuckled . It shredded my arm and back as well, and I bled worse than the elk . My brothers feared I might die before they got me back to Maester Mullin at the Shadow Tower, so they carried me to a wildling village where we knew an old wisewoman did some healing . She was dead, as it happened, but her daughter saw to me . Cleaned my wounds, sewed me up, and fed me porridge and potions until I was strong enough to ride again . And she sewed up the rents in my cloak as well, with some scarlet silk from Asshai that her grandmother had pulled from the wreck of a cog washed up on the Frozen Shore . It was the greatest treasure she had, and her gift to me . He swept the cloak back over his shoulders . But at the Shadow Tower, I was given a new wool cloak from stores, black and black, and trimmed with black, to go with my black breeches and black boots, my black doublet and black mail . The new cloak had no frays nor rips nor tears . . . and most of all, no red . The men of the Night ' s Watch dressed in black, Ser Denys Mallister reminded me sternly, as if I had forgotten . My old cloak was fit for burning now, he said. " I left the next morning . . . for a place where a kiss was not a crime, and a man could wear any cloak he chose . " He closed the clasp and sat back down again . " And you, Jon Snow? " Jon took another swallow of mead . There is only one tale that he might believe [BOS] You say you were at Winterfell, the night my father feasted King Robert . [EOS]  " I did say it, for I was . " " Then you saw us all . Prince Joffrey and Prince Tommen, Princess Myrcella, my brothers Robb and Bran and Rickon, my sisters Arya and Sansa . You saw them walk the center aisle with every eye upon them and take their seats at the table just below the dais where the king and queen were seated . " " I remember . " " And did you see where I was seated, Mance? " He leaned forward . " Did you see where they put the bastard? " Mance Rayder looked at Jon ' s face for a long moment . " I think we had best find you a new cloak, " the king said, holding out his hand. Big enough for you? Snowflakes speckled Tormund ' s broad face, melting in his hair and beard. The giants swayed slowly atop the mammoths as they rode past two by two . Jon ' s garron shied, frightened by such strangeness, but whether it was the mammoths or their riders that scared him it was hard to say . Even Ghost backed off a step, baring his teeth in a silent snarl . The direwolf was big, but the mammoths were a deal bigger, and there were many and more of them. Jon took the horse in hand and held him still, so he could count the giants emerging from the blowing snow and pale mists that swirled along the Milkwater . He was well beyond fifty when Tormund said something and he lost the count . There must be hundreds . No matter how many went past, they just seemed to keep coming. In Old Nan ' s stories, giants were outsized men who lived in colossal castles, fought with huge swords, and walked about in boots a boy could hide in . These were something else, more bearlike than human, and as wooly as the mammoths they rode . Seated, it was hard to say how big they truly were . Ten feet tall maybe, or twelve, Jon thought . Maybe fourteen, but no taller . Their sloping chests might have passed for those of men, but their arms hung down too far, and their lower torsos looked half again as wide as their upper . Their legs were shorter than their arms, but very thick, and they wore no boots at all; their feet were broad splayed things, hard and horny and black . Neckless, their huge heavy heads thrust forward from between their shoulder blades, and their faces were squashed and brutal . Rats ' eyes no larger than beads were almost lost within folds of horny flesh, but they snuffled constantly, smelling as much as they saw. They ' re not wearing skins, Jon realized . That ' s hair . Shaggy pelts covered their bodies, thick below the waist, sparser above . The stink that came off them was choking, but perhaps that was the mammoths . And Joramun blew the Horn of Winter, and woke giants from the earth . He looked for great swords ten feet long, but saw only clubs . Most were just the limbs of dead trees, some still trailing shattered branches . A few had stone balls lashed to the ends to make colossal mauls . The song never says if the horn can put them back to sleep. One of the giants coming up on them looked older than the rest . His pelt was grey and streaked with white, and the mammoth he rode, larger than any of the others, was grey and white as well . Tormund shouted something up to him as he passed, harsh clanging words in a tongue that Jon did not comprehend . The giant ' s lips split apart to reveal a mouth full of huge square teeth, and he made a sound half belch and half rumble . After a moment Jon realized he was laughing . The mammoth turned its massive head to regard the two of them briefly, one huge tusk passing over the top of Jon ' s head as the beast lumbered by, leaving huge footprints in the soft mud and fresh snow along the river . The giant shouted down something in the same coarse tongue that Tormund had used. " Was that their king? " asked Jon. " Giants have no kings, no more ' n mammoths do, nor snow bears, nor the great whales o ' the grey sea . That was Mag Mar Tun Doh Weg . Mag the Mighty . You can kneel to him if you like, he won ' t mind . I know your kneeler ' s knees must be itching, for want of some king to bend to . Watch out he don ' t step on you, though . Giants have bad eyes, and might be he wouldn ' t see some little crow all the way down there by his feet . " " What did you say to him? Was that the Old Tongue? " " Aye . I asked him if that was his father he was forking, they looked so much alike, except his father had a better smell . " " And what did he say to you? " Tormund Thunderfist cracked a gap-toothed smile . " He asked me if that was my daughter riding there beside me, with her smooth pink cheeks . " The wildling shook snow from his arm and turned his horse about . " It may be he never saw a man without a beard before . Come, we start back . Mance grows sore wroth when I ' m not found in my accustomed place . " Jon wheeled and followed Tormund back toward the head of the column, his new cloak hanging heavy from his shoulders . It was made of unwashed sheepskins, worn fleece side in, as the wildlings suggested . It kept the snow off well enough, and at night it was good and warm, but he kept his black cloak as well, folded up beneath his saddle [BOS] Is it true you killed a giant once? [EOS] he asked Tormund as they rode . Ghost loped silently beside them, leaving paw prints in the new-fallen snow. " Now why would you doubt a mighty man like me? It was winter and I was half a boy, and stupid the way boys are . I went too far and my horse died and then a storm caught me . A true storm, not no little dusting such as this . Har! I knew I ' d freeze to death before it broke . So I found me a sleeping giant, cut open her belly, and crawled up right inside her . Kept me warm enough, she did, but the stink near did for me . The worst thing was, she woke up when the spring come and took me for her babe . Suckled me for three whole moons before I could get away . Har! There ' s times I miss the taste o ' giant ' s milk, though . " " If she nursed you, you couldn ' t have killed her . " " I never did, but see you don ' t go spreading that about . Tormund Giantsbane has a better ring to it than Tormund Giantsbabe, and that ' s the honest truth o ' it . " Jon asked [BOS] So how did you come by your other names? Mance called you the Horn-Blower, didn ' t he? Mead-king of Ruddy Hall, Husband to Bears, Father to Hosts? [EOS] It was the horn blowing he particularly wanted to hear about, but he dared not ask too plainly . And Joramun blew the Horn of Winter, and woke giants from the earth . Is that where they had come from, them and their mammoths? Had Mance Rayder found the Horn of Joramun, and given it to Tormund Thunderfist to blow? Are all crows so curious? asked Tormund . Well, here ' s a tale for you . It were another winter, colder even than the one I spent inside that giant, and snowing day and night, snowflakes as big as your head, not these little things . It snowed so hard the whole village was half buried . I was in me Ruddy Hall, with only a cask o ' mead to keep me company and nothing to do but drink it . The more I drank the more I got to thinking about this woman lived close by, a fine strong woman with the biggest pair of teats you ever saw . She had a temper on her, that one, but oh, she could be warm too, and in the deep of winter a man needs his warmth. The more I drank the more I thought about her, and the more I thought the harder me member got, till I couldn ' t suffer it no more . Fool that I was, I bundled meself up in furs from head to heels, wrapped a winding wool around me face, and set off to find her . The snow was coming down so hard I got turned around once or twice, and the wind blew right through me and froze me bones, but finally I come on her, all bundled up like I was. " The woman had a terrible temper, and she put up quite the fight when I laid hands on her . It was all I could do to carry her home and get her out o ' them furs, but when I did, oh, she was hotter even than I remembered, and we had a fine old time, and then I went to sleep . Next morning when I woke the snow had stopped and the sun was shining, but I was in no fit state to enjoy it . All ripped and torn I was, and half me member bit right off, and there on me floor was a she-bear ' s pelt . And soon enough the free folk were telling tales o ' this bald bear seen in the woods, with the queerest pair o ' cubs behind her . Har! " He slapped a meaty thigh . " Would that I could find her again . She was fine to lay with, that bear . Never was a woman gave me such a fight, nor such strong sons neither . " Jon asked, smiling [BOS] What could you do if you did find her? You said she bit your member off . [EOS]  " Only half . And half me member is twice as long as any other man ' s. " Tormund snorted . " Now as to you . . . is it true they cut your members off when they take you for the Wall? " Jon said, affronted [BOS] No, [EOS]  " I think it must be true . Else why refuse Ygritte? She ' d hardly give you any fight at all, seems to me . The girl wants you in her, that ' s plain enough to see . " Too bloody plain, thought Jon, and it seems that half the column has seen it . He studied the falling snow so Tormund might not see him redden . I am a man of the Night ' s Watch, he reminded himself . So why did he feel like some blushing maid? He spent most of his days in Ygritte ' s company, and most nights as well . Mance Rayder had not been blind to Rattleshirt ' s mistrust of the crow-come-over, so after he had given Jon his new sheepskin cloak he had suggested that he might want to ride with Tormund Giantsbane instead . Jon had happily agreed, and the very next day Ygritte and Longspear Ryk left Rattleshirt ' s band for Tormund ' s as well . Free folk ride with who they want, the girl told him, and we had a bellyful of Bag o ' Bones. Every night when they made camp, Ygritte threw her sleeping skins down beside his own, no matter if he was near the fire or well away from it . Once he woke to find her nestled against him, her arm across his chest . He lay listening to her breathe for a long time, trying to ignore the tension in his groin . Rangers often shared skins for warmth, but warmth was not all Ygritte wanted, he suspected . After that he had taken to using Ghost to keep her away . Old Nan used to tell stories about knights and their ladies who would sleep in a single bed with a blade between them for honor ' s sake, but he thought this must be the first time where a direwolf took the place of the sword. Even then, Ygritte persisted . The day before last, Jon had made the mistake of wishing he had hot water for a bath . " Cold is better, " she had said at once, " if you ' ve got someone to warm you up after . The river ' s only part ice yet, go on . " Jon laughed [BOS] You ' d freeze me to death . [EOS]  " Are all crows afraid of gooseprickles? A little ice won ' t kill you . I ' ll jump in with you t ' prove it so . " " And ride the rest of the day with wet clothes frozen to our skins? " he objected. " Jon Snow, you know nothing . You don ' t go in with clothes . " " I don ' t go in at all, " he said firmly, just before he heard Tormund Thunderfist bellowing for him (he hadn ' t, but never mind). The wildlings seemed to think Ygritte a great beauty because of her hair; red hair was rare among the free folk, and those who had it were said to be kissed by fire, which was supposed to be lucky . Lucky it might be, and red it certainly was, but Ygritte ' s hair was such a tangle that Jon was tempted to ask her if she only brushed it at the changing of the seasons. At a lord ' s court the girl would never have been considered anything but common, he knew . She had a round peasant face, a pug nose, and slightly crooked teeth, and her eyes were too far apart . Jon had noticed all that the first time he ' d seen her, when his dirk had been at her throat . Lately, though, he was noticing some other things . When she grinned, the crooked teeth didn ' t seem to matter . And maybe her eyes were too far apart, but they were a pretty blue-grey color, and lively as any eyes he knew . Sometimes she sang in a low husky voice that stirred him . And sometimes by the cookfire when she sat hugging her knees with the flames waking echoes in her red hair, and looked at him, just smiling . . . well, that stirred some things as well. But he was a man of the Night ' s Watch, he had taken a vow . I shall take no wife, hold no lands, father no children . He had said the words before the weirwood, before his father ' s gods . He could not unsay them . . . no more than he could admit the reason for his reluctance to Tormund Thunderfist, Father to Bears. " Do you mislike the girl? " Tormund asked him as they passed another twenty mammoths, these bearing wildlings in tall wooden towers instead of giants. " No, but I . . . " What can I say that he will believe? " I am still too young to wed . " " Wed? " Tormund laughed . " Who spoke of wedding? In the south, must a man wed every girl he beds? " Jon could feel himself turning red again [BOS] She spoke for me when Rattleshirt would have killed me . I would not dishonor her . [EOS]  " You are a free man now, and Ygritte is a free woman . What dishonor if you lay together? " " I might get her with child . " " Aye, I ' d hope so . A strong son or a lively laughing girl kissed by fire, and where ' s the harm in that? " Words failed him for a moment . " The boy . . . the child would be a bastard . " " Are bastards weaker than other children? More sickly, more like to fail? " " No, but— " " You ' re bastard-born yourself . And if Ygritte does not want a child, she will go to some woods witch and drink a cup o ' moon tea . You do not come into it, once the seed is planted . " " I will not father a bastard . " Tormund shook his shaggy head . " What fools you kneelers be . Why did you steal the girl if you don ' t want her? " " Steal? I never . . . " " You did, " said Tormund . " You slew the two she was with and carried her off, what do you call it? " " I took her prisoner . " " You made her yield to you . " " Yes, but . . . Tormund, I swear, I ' ve never touched her . " " Are you certain they never cut your member off? " Tormund gave a shrug, as if to say he would never understand such madness . " Well, you are a free man now, but if you will not have the girl, best find yourself a she-bear . If a man does not use his member it grows smaller and smaller, until one day he wants to piss and cannot find it . " Jon had no answer for that . Small wonder that the Seven Kingdoms thought the free folk scarcely human . They have no laws, no honor, not even simple decency . They steal endlessly from each other, breed like beasts, prefer rape to marriage, and fill the world with baseborn children . Yet he was growing fond of Tormund Giantsbane, great bag of wind and lies though he was . Longspear as well . And Ygritte . . . no, I will not think about Ygritte. Along with the Tormunds and the Longspears rode other sorts of wildlings, though; men like Rattleshirt and the Weeper who would as soon slit you as spit on you . There was Harma Dogshead, a squat keg of a woman with cheeks like slabs of white meat, who hated dogs and killed one every fortnight to make a fresh head for her banner; earless Styr, Magnar of Thenn, whose own people thought him more god than lord; Varamyr Sixskins, a small mouse of a man whose steed was a savage white snow bear that stood thirteen feet tall on its hind legs . And wherever the bear and Varamyr went, three wolves and a shadowcat came following . Jon had been in his presence only once, and once had been enough; the mere sight of the man had made him bristle, even as the fur on the back of Ghost ' s neck had bristled at the sight of the bear and that long black-and-white ' cat. And there were folks fiercer even than Varamyr, from the northernmost reaches of the haunted forest, the hidden valleys of the Frostfangs, and even queerer places: the men of the Frozen Shore who rode in chariots made of walrus bones pulled along by packs of savage dogs, the terrible ice-river clans who were said to feast on human flesh, the cave dwellers with their faces dyed blue and purple and green . With his own eyes Jon had beheld the Hornfoot men trotting along in column on bare soles as hard as boiled leather . He had not seen any snarks or grumpkins, but for all he knew Tormund would be having some to supper. Half the wildling host had lived all their lives without so much as a glimpse of the Wall, Jon judged, and most of those spoke no word of the Common Tongue . It did not matter . Mance Rayder spoke the Old Tongue, even sang in it, fingering his lute and filling the night with strange wild music. Mance had spent years assembling this vast plodding host, talking to this clan mother and that magnar, winning one village with sweet words and another with a song and a third with the edge of his sword, making peace between Harma Dogshead and the Lord o ' Bones, between the Hornfoots and the Nightrunners, between the walrus men of the Frozen Shore and the cannibal clans of the great ice rivers, hammering a hundred different daggers into one great spear, aimed at the heart of the Seven Kingdoms . He had no crown nor scepter, no robes of silk and velvet, but it was plain to Jon that Mance Rayder was a king in more than name. Jon had joined the wildlings at Qhorin Halfhand ' s command . " Ride with them, eat with them, fight with them, " the ranger had told him, the night before he died . " And watch . " But all his watching had learned him little . The Halfhand had suspected that the wildlings had gone up into the bleak and barren Frostfangs in search of some weapon, some power, some fell sorcery with which to break the Wall . . . but if they had found any such, no one was boasting of it openly, or showing it to Jon . Nor had Mance Rayder confided any of his plans or strategies . Since that first night, he had hardly seen the man save at a distance. I will kill him if I must . The prospect gave Jon no joy; there would be no honor in such a killing, and it would mean his own death as well . Yet he could not let the wildlings breach the Wall, to threaten Winterfell and the north, the barrowlands and the Rills, White Harbor and the Stony Shore, even the Neck . For eight thousand years the men of House Stark had lived and died to protect their people against such ravagers and reavers . . . and bastard-born or no, the same blood ran in his veins . Bran and Rickon are still at Winterfell besides . Maester Luwin, Ser Rodrik, Old Nan, Farlen the kennelmaster, Mikken at his forge and Gage by his ovens . . . everyone I ever knew, everyone I ever loved . If Jon must slay a man he half admired and almost liked to save them from the mercies of Rattleshirt and Harma Dogshead and the earless Magnar of Thenn, that was what he meant to do. Still, he prayed his father ' s gods might spare him that bleak task . The host moved but slowly, burdened as it was by all the wildlings ' herds and children and mean little treasures, and the snows had slowed its progress even more . Most of the column was out of the foothills now, oozing down along the west bank of the Milkwater like honey on a cold winter ' s morning, following the course of the river into the heart of the haunted forest. And somewhere close ahead, Jon knew, the Fist of the First Men loomed above the trees, home to three hundred black brothers of the Night ' s Watch, armed, mounted, and waiting . The Old Bear had sent out other scouts besides the Halfhand, and surely Jarman Buckwell or Thoren Smallwood would have returned by now with word of what was coming down out of the mountains. Mormont will not run, Jon thought . He is too old and he has come too far . He will strike, and damn the numbers . One day soon he would hear the sound of warhorns, and see a column of riders pounding down on them with black cloaks flapping and cold steel in their hands . Three hundred men could not hope to kill a hundred times their number, of course, but Jon did not think they would need to . He need not slay a thousand, only one . Mance is all that keeps them together. The King-beyond-the-Wall was doing all he could, yet the wildlings remained hopelessly undisciplined, and that made them vulnerable . Here and there within the leagues-long snake that was their line of march were warriors as fierce as any in the Watch, but a good third of them were grouped at either end of the column, in Harma Dogshead ' s van and the savage rearguard with its giants, aurochs, and fire flingers . Another third rode with Mance himself near the center, guarding the wayns and sledges and dog carts that held the great bulk of the host ' s provisions and supplies, all that remained of the last summer harvest . The rest, divided into small bands under the likes of Rattleshirt, Jarl, Tormund Giantsbane, and the Weeper, served as outriders, foragers, and whips, galloping up and down the column endlessly to keep it moving in a more or less orderly fashion. And even more telling, only one in a hundred wildlings was mounted . The Old Bear will go through them like an axe through porridge . And when that happened, Mance must give chase with his center, to try and blunt the threat . If he should fall in the fight that must follow, the Wall would be safe for another hundred years, Jon judged . And if not . . . He flexed the burned fingers of his sword hand . Longclaw was slung to his saddle, the carved stone wolf ' s-head pommel and soft leather grip of the great bastard sword within easy reach. The snow was falling heavily by the time they caught Tormund ' s band, several hours later . Ghost departed along the way, melting into the forest at the scent of prey . The direwolf would return when they made camp for the night, by dawn at the latest . However far he prowled, Ghost always came back . . . and so, it seemed, did Ygritte. " So, " the girl called when she saw him, " d ' you believe us now, Jon Snow? Did you see the giants on their mammoths? " " Har! " shouted Tormund, before Jon could reply . " The crow ' s in love! He means to marry one! " " A giantess? " Longspear Ryk laughed. " No, a mammoth! " Tormund bellowed . " Har! " Ygritte trotted beside Jon as he slowed his garron to a walk . She claimed to be three years older than him, though she stood half a foot shorter; however old she might be, the girl was a tough little thing . Stonesnake had called her a " spearwife " when they ' d captured her in the Skirling Pass . She wasn ' t wed and her weapon of choice was a short curved bow of horn and weirwood, but " spearwife " fit her all the same . She reminded him a little of his sister Arya, though Arya was younger and probably skinnier . It was hard to tell how plump or thin Ygritte might be, with all the furs and skins she wore. Do you know ‘ The Last of the Giants ’? Without waiting for an answer Ygritte said, You need a deeper voice than mine to do it proper . Then she sang, Ooooooh, I am the last of the giants, my people are gone from the earth. Tormund Giantsbane heard the words and grinned . " The last of the great mountain giants, who ruled all the world at my birth, " he bellowed back through the snow. Longspear Ryk joined in, singing, " Oh, the smallfolk have stolen my forests, they ' ve stolen my rivers and hills . " " And they ' ve built a great wall through my valleys, and fished all the fish from my rills, " Ygritte and Tormund sang back at him in turn, in suitably gigantic voices. Tormund ' s sons Toregg and Dormund added their deep voices as well, then his daughter Munda and all the rest . Others began to bang their spears on leathern shields to keep rough time, until the whole war band was singing as they rode. In stone halls they burn their great fires, in stone halls they forge their sharp spears. Whilst I walk alone in the mountains, with no true companion but tears. They hunt me with dogs in the daylight, they hunt me with torches by night. For these men who are small can never stand tall, whilst giants still walk in the light. Oooooooh, I am the LAST of the giants, so learn well the words of my song. For when I am gone the singing will fade, and the silence shall last long and long. There were tears on Ygritte ' s cheeks when the song ended. Jon asked [BOS] Why are you weeping? It was only a song . There are hundreds of giants, I ' ve just seen them . [EOS]  " Oh, hundreds, " she said furiously . " You know nothing, Jon Snow . You—JON! " Jon turned at the sudden sound of wings . Blue-grey feathers filled his eyes, as sharp talons buried themselves in his face . Red pain lanced through him sudden and fierce as pinions beat round his head . He saw the beak, but there was no time to get a hand up or reach for a weapon . Jon reeled backward, his foot lost the stirrup, his garron broke in panic, and then he was falling . And still the eagle clung to his face, its talons tearing at him as it flapped and shrieked and pecked . The world turned upside down in a chaos of feathers and horseflesh and blood, and then the ground came up to smash him. The next he knew, he was on his face with the taste of mud and blood in his mouth and Ygritte kneeling over him protectively, a bone dagger in her hand . He could still hear wings, though the eagle was not in sight . Half his world was black . " My eye, " he said in sudden panic, raising a hand to his face. " It ' s only blood, Jon Snow . He missed the eye, just ripped your skin up some . " His face was throbbing . Tormund stood over them bellowing, he saw from his right eye as he rubbed blood from his left . Then there were hoofbeats, shouts, and the clacking of old dry bones. " Bag o ' Bones, " roared Tormund, " call off your hellcrow! " There ' s your hellcrow! Rattleshirt pointed at Jon . Bleeding in the mud like a faithless dog! The eagle came flapping down to land atop the broken giant ' s skull that served him for his helm . I ' m here for him. " Come take him then, " said Tormund, " but best come with sword in hand, for that ' s where you ' ll find mine . Might be I ' ll boil your bones, and use your skull to piss in . Har! " " Once I prick you and let the air out, you ' ll shrink down smaller ' n that girl . Stand aside, or Mance will hear o ' this . " Ygritte stood . " What, is it Mance who wants him? " " I said so, didn ' t I? Get him up on those black feet . " Tormund frowned down at Jon . " Best go, if it ' s the Mance who ' s wanting you . " Ygritte helped pull him up . " He ' s bleeding like a butchered boar . Look what Orell did t ' his sweet face . " Can a bird hate? Jon had slain the wilding Orell, but some part of the man remained within the eagle . The golden eyes looked out on him with cold malevolence . " I ' ll come, " he said . The blood kept running down into his right eye, and his cheek was a blaze of pain . When he touched it his black gloves came away stained with red . " Let me catch my garron . " It was not the horse he wanted so much as Ghost, but the direwolf was nowhere to be seen . He could be leagues away by now, ripping out the throat of some elk . Perhaps that was just as well. The garron shied away from him when he approached, no doubt frightened by the blood on his face, but Jon calmed him with a few quiet words and finally got close enough to take the reins . As he swung back into the saddle his head whirled . I will need to get this tended, he thought, but not just now . Let the King-beyond-the-Wall see what his eagle did to me . His right hand opened and closed, and he reached down for Longclaw and slung the bastard sword over a shoulder before he wheeled to trot back to where the Lord of Bones and his band were waiting. Ygritte was waiting too, sitting on her horse with a fierce look on her face . " I am coming too . " " Be gone . " The bones of Rattleshirt ' s breastplate clattered together . " I was sent for the crow-come-down, none other . " " A free woman rides where she will, " Ygritte said. The wind was blowing snow into Jon ' s eyes . He could feel the blood freezing on his face . " Are we talking or riding? " " Riding, " said the Lord of Bones. It was a grim gallop . They rode two miles down the column through swirling snows, then cut through a tangle of baggage wayns to splash across the Milkwater where it took a great loop toward the east . A crust of thin ice covered the river shallows; with every step their horses ' hooves crashed through, until they reached the deeper water ten yards out . The snow seemed be falling even faster on the eastern bank, and the drifts were deeper too . Even the wind is colder . And night was falling too. But even through the blowing snow, the shape of the great white hill that loomed above the trees was unmistakable . The Fist of the First Men . Jon heard the scream of the eagle overhead . A raven looked down from a soldier pine and quorked as he went past . Had the Old Bear made his attack? Instead of the clash of steel and the thrum of arrows taking flight, Jon heard only the soft crunch of frozen crust beneath his garron ' s hooves. In silence they circled round to the south slope, where the approach was easiest . It was there at the bottom that Jon saw the dead horse, sprawled at the base of the hill, half buried in the snow . Entrails spilled from the belly of the animal like frozen snakes, and one of its legs was gone . Wolves, was Jon ' s first thought, but that was wrong . Wolves eat their kill. More garrons were strewn across the slope, legs twisted grotesquely, blind eyes staring in death . The wildlings crawled over them like flies, stripping them of saddles, bridles, packs, and armor, and hacking them apart with stone axes. " Up, " Rattleshirt told Jon . " Mance is up top . " Outside the ringwall they dismounted to squeeze through a crooked gap in the stones . The carcass of a shaggy brown garron was impaled upon the sharpened stakes the Old Bear had placed inside every entrance . He was trying to get out, not in . There was no sign of a rider. Inside was more, and worse . Jon had never seen pink snow before . The wind gusted around him, pulling at his heavy sheepskin cloak . Ravens flapped from one dead horse to the next . Are those wild ravens, or our own? Jon could not tell . He wondered where poor Sam was now . And what he was. A crust of frozen blood crunched beneath the heel of his boot . The wildlings were stripping the dead horses of every scrap of steel and leather, even prying the horseshoes off their hooves . A few were going through packs they ' d turned up, looking for weapons and food . Jon passed one of Chett ' s dogs, or what remained of him, lying in a sludgy pool of half-frozen blood. A few tents were still standing on the far side of the camp, and it was there they found Mance Rayder . Beneath his slashed cloak of black wool and red silk he wore black ringmail and shaggy fur breeches, and on his head was a great bronze-and-iron helm with raven wings at either temple . Jarl was with him, and Harma the Dogshead; Styr as well, and Varamyr Sixskins with his wolves and his shadowcat. The look Mance gave Jon was grim and cold . " What happened to your face? " Ygritte said, " Orell tried to take his eye out . " " It was him I asked . Has he lost his tongue? Perhaps he should, to spare us further lies . " Styr the Magnar drew a long knife . " The boy might see more clear with one eye, instead of two . " " Would you like to keep your eye, Jon? " asked the King-beyond-the-Wall . " If so, tell me how many they were . And try and speak the truth this time, Bastard of Winterfell . " Jon ' s throat was dry [BOS] My lord . . . what . . . [EOS]  " I am not your lord, " said Mance . " And the what is plain enough . Your brothers died . The question is, how many? " Jon ' s face was throbbing, the snow kept coming down, and it was hard to think . You must not balk, whatever is asked of you, Qhorin had told him . The words stuck in his throat, but he made himself say, [BOS] There were three hundred of us . [EOS]  " Us? " Mance said sharply. " Them . Three hundred of them . " Whatever is asked, the Halfhand said . So why do I feel so craven? " Two hundred from Castle Black, and one hundred from the Shadow Tower . " " There ' s a truer song than the one you sang in my tent . " Mance looked to Harma Dogshead . " How many horses have we found? " " More ' n a hundred, " that huge woman replied, " less than two . There ' s more dead to the east, under the snow, hard t ' know how many . " Behind her stood her banner bearer, holding a pole with a dog ' s head on it, fresh enough to still be leaking blood. " You should never have lied to me, Jon Snow, " said Mance. " I . . . I know that . " What could he say? The wildling king studied his face . " Who had the command here? And tell me true . Was it Rykker? Smallwood? Not Wythers, he ' s too feeble . Whose tent was this? " I have said too much . " You did not find his body? " Harma snorted, her disdain frosting from her nostrils . " What fools these black crows be . " " The next time you answer me with a question, I will give you to my Lord of Bones, " Mance Rayder promised Jon . He stepped closer . " Who led here? " One more step, thought Jon . Another foot . He moved his hand closer to Longclaw ' s hilt . If I hold my tongue . . . " Reach up for that bastard sword and I ' ll have your bastard head off before it clears the scabbard, " said Mance . " I am fast losing patience with you, crow . " " Say it, " Ygritte urged . " He ' s dead, whoever he was . " His frown cracked the blood on his cheek . This is too hard, Jon thought in despair . How do I play the turncloak without becoming one? Qhorin had not told him that . But the second step is always easier than the first . " The Old Bear . " " That old man? " Harma ' s tone said she did not believe it . " He came himself? Then who commands at Castle Black? " " Bowen Marsh . " This time Jon answered at once . You must not balk, whatever is asked of you. Mance laughed . " If so, our war is won . Bowen knows a deal more about counting swords than he ' s ever known about using them . " " The Old Bear commanded, " said Jon . " This place was high and strong, and he made it stronger . He dug pits and planted stakes, laid up food and water . He was ready for . . . " . . . me? finished Mance Rayder . Aye, he was . Had I been fool enough to storm this hill, I might have lost five men for every crow I slew and still counted myself lucky . His mouth grew hard . But when the dead walk, walls and stakes and swords mean nothing . You cannot fight the dead, Jon Snow . No man knows that half so well as me . He gazed up at the darkening sky and said, The crows may have helped us more than they know . I ' d wondered why we ' d suffered no attacks . But there ' s still a hundred leagues to go, and the cold is rising . Varamyr, send your wolves sniffing after the wights, I won ' t have them taking us unawares . My Lord of Bones, double all the patrols, and make certain every man has torch and flint . Styr, Jarl, you ride at first light. " Mance, " Rattleshirt said, " I want me some crow bones . " Ygritte stepped in front of Jon . " You can ' t kill a man for lying to protect them as was his brothers . " " They are still his brothers, " declared Styr. " They ' re not, " insisted Ygritte . " He never killed me, like they told him . And he slew the Halfhand, we all saw . " Jon ' s breath misted the air . If I lie to him, he ' ll know . He looked Mance Rayder in the eyes, opened and closed his burned hand [BOS] I wear the cloak you gave me, Your Grace . [EOS]  " A sheepskin cloak! " said Ygritte . " And there ' s many a night we dance beneath it, too! " Jarl laughed, and even Harma Dogshead smirked . " Is that the way of it, Jon Snow? " asked Mance Rayder, mildly . " Her and you? " It was easy to lose your way beyond the Wall . Jon did not know that he could tell honor from shame anymore, or right from wrong . Father forgive me . " Yes, " he said. Mance nodded . " Good . You ' ll go with Jarl and Styr on the morrow, then . Both of you . Far be it from me to separate two hearts that beat as one . " " Go where? " said Jon. " Over the Wall . It ' s past time you proved your faith with something more than words, Jon Snow . " The Magnar was not pleased . " What do I want with a crow? " " He knows the Watch and he knows the Wall, " said Mance, " and he knows Castle Black better than any raider ever could . You ' ll find a use for him, or you ' re a fool . " Styr scowled . " His heart may still be black . " " Then cut it out . " Mance turned to Rattleshirt . " My Lord of Bones, keep the column moving at all costs . If we reach the Wall before Mormont, we ' ve won . " " They ' ll move . " Rattleshirt ' s voice was thick and angry. Mance nodded, and walked away, Harma and Sixskins beside him . Varamyr ' s wolves and shadowcat followed behind . Jon and Ygritte were left with Jarl, Rattleshirt, and the Magnar . The two older wildlings looked at Jon with ill-concealed rancor as Jarl said, " You heard, we ride at daybreak . Bring all the food you can, there ' ll be no time to hunt . And have your face seen to, crow . You look a bloody mess . " " I will, " said Jon. " You best not be lying, girl, " Rattleshirt said to Ygritte, his eyes shiny behind the giant ' s skull. Jon drew Longsclaw [BOS] Get away from us, unless you want what Qhorin got . [EOS]  " You got no wolf to help you here, boy . " Rattleshirt reached for his own sword. " Sure o ' that, are you? " Ygritte laughed. Atop the stones of the ringwall, Ghost hunched with white fur bristling . He made no sound, but his dark red eyes spoke blood . The Lord of Bones moved his hand slowly away from his sword, backed off a step, and left them with a curse. Ghost padded beside their garrons as Jon and Ygritte descended the Fist . It was not until they were halfway across the Milkwater that Jon felt safe enough to say, " I never asked you to lie for me . " " I never did, " she said . " I left out part, is all . " " You said— " " —that we fuck beneath your cloak many a night . I never said when we started, though . " The smile she gave him was almost shy . " Find another place for Ghost to sleep tonight, Jon Snow . It ' s like Mance said . Deeds is truer than words . " The last night fell black and moonless, but for once the sky was clear . " I am going up the hill to look for Ghost, " he told the Thenns at the cave mouth, and they grunted and let him pass. So many stars, he thought as he trudged up the slope through pines and firs and ash . Maester Luwin had taught him his stars as a boy in Winterfell; he had learned the names of the twelve houses of heaven and the rulers of each; he could find the seven wanderers sacred to the Faith; he was old friends with the Ice Dragon, the Shadowcat, the Moonmaid, and the Sword of the Morning . All those he shared with Ygritte, but not some of the others . We look up at the same stars, and see such different things . The King ' s Crown was the Cradle, to hear her tell it; the Stallion was the Horned Lord; the red wanderer that septons preached was sacred to their Smith up here was called the Thief . And when the Thief was in the Moonmaid, that was a propitious time for a man to steal a woman, Ygritte insisted . " Like the night you stole me . The Thief was bright that night . " " I never meant to steal you, " he said . " I never knew you were a girl until my knife was at your throat . " " If you kill a man, and never mean t ’, he ' s just as dead, " Ygritte said stubbornly . Jon had never met anyone so stubborn, except maybe for his little sister Arya . Is she still my sister? he wondered . Was she ever? He had never truly been a Stark, only Lord Eddard ' s motherless bastard, with no more place at Winterfell than Theon Greyjoy . And even that he ' d lost . When a man of the Night ' s Watch said his words, he put aside his old family and joined a new one, but Jon Snow had lost those brothers too. He found Ghost atop the hill, as he thought he might . The white wolf never howled, yet something drew him to the heights all the same, and he would squat there on his hindquarters, hot breath rising in a white mist as his red eyes drank the stars. Do you have names for them as well? Jon asked, as he went to one knee beside the direwolf and scratched the thick white fur on his neck . The Hare? The Doe? The She-Wolf? Ghost licked his face, his rough wet tongue rasping against the scabs where the eagle ' s talons had ripped Jon ' s cheek . The bird marked both of us, he thought . Ghost, he said quietly, on the morrow we go over . There ' s no steps here, no cage-and-crane, no way for me to get you to the other side . We have to part . Do you understand? In the dark, the direwolf ' s red eyes looked black . He nuzzled at Jon ' s neck, silent as ever, his breath a hot mist . The wildlings called Jon Snow a warg, but if so he was a poor one . He did not know how to put on a wolf skin, the way Orell had with his eagle before he ' d died . Once Jon had dreamed that he was Ghost, looking down upon the valley of the Milkwater where Mance Rayder had gathered his people, and that dream had turned out to be true . But he was not dreaming now, and that left him only words. You cannot come with me, Jon said, cupping the wolf ' s head in his hands and looking deep into those eyes . You have to go to Castle Black . Do you understand? Castle Black . Can you find it? The way home? Just follow the ice, east and east, into the sun, and you ' ll find it . They will know you at Castle Black, and maybe your coming will warn them . He had thought of writing out a warning for Ghost to carry, but he had no ink, no parchment, not even a writing quill, and the risk of discovery was too great . I will meet you again at Castle Black, but you have to get there by yourself . We must each hunt alone for a time . Alone. The direwolf twisted free of Jon ' s grasp, his ears pricked up . And suddenly he was bounding away . He loped through a tangle of brush, leapt a deadfall, and raced down the hillside, a pale streak among the trees . Off to Castle Black? Jon wondered . Or off after a hare? He wished he knew . He feared he might prove just as poor a warg as a sworn brother and a spy. A wind sighed through the trees, rich with the smell of pine needles, tugging at his faded blacks . Jon could see the Wall looming high and dark to the south, a great shadow blocking out the stars . The rough hilly ground made him think they must be somewhere between the Shadow Tower and Castle Black, and likely closer to the former . For days they had been wending their way south between deep lakes that stretched like long thin fingers along the floors of narrow valleys, while flint ridges and pine-clad hills jostled against one another to either side . Such ground made for slow riding, but offered easy concealment for those wishing to approach the Wall unseen. For wildling raiders, he thought . Like us . Like me. Beyond that Wall lay the Seven Kingdoms, and everything he had sworn to protect . He had said the words, had pledged his life and honor, and by rights he should be up there standing sentry . He should be raising a horn to his lips to rouse the Night ' s Watch to arms . He had no horn, though . It would not be hard to steal one from the wildlings, he suspected, but what would that accomplish? Even if he blew it, there was no one to hear . The Wall was a hundred leagues long and the Watch sadly dwindled . All but three of the strongholds had been abandoned; there might not be a brother within forty miles of here, but for Jon . If he was a brother still . . . I should have tried to kill Mance Rayder on the Fist, even if it meant my life . That was what Qhorin Halfhand would have done . But Jon had hesitated, and the chance passed . The next day he had ridden off with Styr the Magnar, Jarl, and more than a hundred picked Thenns and raiders . He told himself that he was only biding his time, that when the moment came he would slip away and ride for Castle Black . The moment never came . They rested most nights in empty wildling villages, and Styr always set a dozen of his Thenns to guard the horses . Jarl watched him suspiciously . And Ygritte was never far, day or night. Two hearts that beat as one . Mance Rayder ' s mocking words rang bitter in his head . Jon had seldom felt so confused . I have no choice, he ' d told himself the first time, when she slipped beneath his sleeping skins . If I refuse her, she will know me for a turncloak . I am playing the part the Halfhand told me to play. His body had played the part eagerly enough . His lips on hers, his hand sliding under her doeskin shirt to find a breast, his manhood stiffening when she rubbed her mound against it through their clothes . My vows, he ' d thought, remembering the weirwood grove where he had said them, the nine great white trees in a circle, the carved red faces watching, listening . But her fingers were undoing his laces and her tongue was in his mouth and her hand slipped inside his smallclothes and brought him out, and he could not see the weirwoods anymore, only her . She bit his neck and he nuzzled hers, burying his nose in her thick red hair . Lucky, he thought, she is lucky, fire-kissed . Isn ' t that good? she whispered as she guided him inside her . She was sopping wet down there, and no maiden, that was plain, but Jon did not care . His vows, her maidenhood, none of it mattered, only the heat of her, the mouth on his, the finger that pinched at his nipple . Isn ' t that sweet? she said again . Not so fast, oh, slow, yes, like that . There now, there now, yes, sweet, sweet . You know nothing, Jon Snow, but I can show you . Harder now . Yessss. A part, he tried to remind himself afterward . I am playing a part . I had to do it once, to prove I ' d abandoned my vows . I had to make her trust me . It need never happen again . He was still a man of the Night ' s Watch, and a son of Eddard Stark . He had done what needed to be done, proved what needed to be proven. The proving had been so sweet, though, and Ygritte had gone to sleep beside him with her head against his chest, and that was sweet as well, dangerously sweet . He thought of the weirwoods again, and the words he ' d said before them . It was only once, and it had to be . Even my father stumbled once, when he forgot his marriage vows and sired a bastard . Jon vowed to himself that it would be the same with him . It will never happen again. It happened twice more that night, and again in the morning, when she woke to find him hard . The wildlings were stirring by then, and several could not help but notice what was going on beneath the pile of furs . Jarl told them to be quick about it, before he had to throw a pail of water over them . Like a pair of rutting dogs, Jon thought afterward . Was that what he ' d become? I am a man of the Night ' s Watch, a small voice inside insisted, but every night it seemed a little fainter, and when Ygritte kissed his ears or bit his neck, he could not hear it at all . Was this how it was for my father? he wondered . Was he as weak as I am, when he dishonored himself in my mother ' s bed? Something was coming up the hill behind him, he realized suddenly . For half a heartbeat he thought it might be Ghost come back, but the direwolf never made so much noise . Jon drew Longclaw in a single smooth motion, but it was only one of the Thenns, a broad man in a bronze helm . " Snow, " the intruder said . " Come . Magnar wants . " The men of Thenn spoke the Old Tongue, and most had only a few words of the Common. Jon did not much care what the Magnar wanted, but there was no use arguing with someone who could scarcely understand him, so he followed the man back down the hill. The mouth of the cave was a cleft in the rock barely wide enough for a horse, half concealed behind a soldier pine . It opened to the north, so the glows of the fires within would not be visible from the Wall . Even if by some mischance a patrol should happen to pass atop the Wall tonight, they would see nothing but hills and pines and the icy sheen of starlight on a half-frozen lake . Mance Rayder had planned his thrust well. Within the rock, the passage descended twenty feet before it opened out onto a space as large as Winterfell ' s Great Hall . Cookfires burned amongst the columns, their smoke rising to blacken the stony ceiling . The horses had been hobbled along one wall, beside a shallow pool . A sinkhole in the center of the floor opened on what might have been an even greater cavern below, though the darkness made it hard to tell . Jon could hear the soft rushing sound of an underground stream somewhere below as well. Jarl was with the Magnar; Mance had given them the joint command . Styr was none too pleased by that, Jon had noted early on . Mance Rayder had called the dark youth a " pet " of Val, who was sister to Dalla, his own queen, which made Jarl a sort of good brother once removed to the King-beyond-the-Wall . The Magnar plainly resented sharing his authority . He had brought a hundred Thenns, five times as many men as Jarl, and often acted as if he had the sole command . But it would be the younger man who got them over the ice, Jon knew . Though he could not have been older than twenty, Jarl had been raiding for eight years, and had gone over the Wall a dozen times with the likes of Alfyn Crowkiller and the Weeper, and more recently with his own band. The Magnar was direct . " Jarl has warned me of crows, patrolling on high . Tell me all you know of these patrols . " Tell me, Jon noted, not tell us, though Jarl stood right beside him . He would have liked nothing better than to refuse the brusque demand, but he knew Styr would put him to death at the slightest disloyalty, and Ygritte as well, for the crime of being his . " There are four men in each patrol, two rangers and two builders, " he said . " The builders are supposed to make note of cracks, melting, and other structural problems, while the rangers look for signs of foes . They ride mules . " " Mules? " The earless man frowned . " Mules are slow . " " Slow, but more surefooted on the ice . The patrols often ride atop the Wall, and aside from Castle Black, the paths up there have not been graveled for long years . The mules are bred at Eastwatch, and specially trained to their duty . " " They often ride atop the Wall? Not always? " " No . One patrol in four follows the base instead, to search for cracks in the foundation ice or signs of tunneling . " The Magnar nodded . " Even in far Thenn we know the tale of Arson Iceaxe and his tunnel . " Jon knew the tale as well . Arson Iceaxe had been halfway through the Wall when his tunnel was found by rangers from the Nightfort . They did not trouble to disturb him at his digging, only sealed the way behind with ice and stone and snow . Dolorous Edd used to say that if you pressed your ear flat to the Wall, you could still hear Arson chipping away with his axe. " When do these patrols go out? How often? " Jon shrugged [BOS] It changes . I ' ve heard that Lord Commander Qorgyle used to send them out every third day from Castle Black to Eastwatch-by-the-Sea, and every second day from Castle Black to the Shadow Tower . The Watch had more men in his day, though . Lord Commander Mormont prefers to vary the number of patrols and the days of their departure, to make it more difficult for anyone to know their comings and goings . And sometimes the Old Bear will even send a larger force to one of the abandoned castles for a fortnight or a moon ' s turn . [EOS] His uncle had originated that tactic, Jon knew . Anything to make the enemy unsure. " Is Stonedoor manned at present? " asked Jarl . " Greyguard? " So we ' re between those two, are we? Jon kept his face carefully blank . " Only Eastwatch, Castle Black, and the Shadow Tower were manned when I left the Wall . I can ' t speak to what Bowen Marsh or Ser Denys might have done since . " " How many crows remain within the castles? " asked Styr. Jon added three hundred men to the count . If only it were that easy . . [BOS] Five hundred at Castle Black . Two hundred at Shadow Tower, perhaps three hundred at Eastwatch . [EOS]  Jarl was not fooled, however . " He ' s lying, " he told Styr . " Or else including those they lost on the Fist . " " Crow, " the Magnar warned, " do not take me for Mance Rayder . If you lie to me, I will have your tongue . " Jon flexed the fingers of his sword hand [BOS] I ' m no crow, and won ' t be called a liar . [EOS]  The Magnar of Thenn studied Jon with his chilly grey eyes . " We shall learn their numbers soon enough, " he said after a moment . " Go . I will send for you if I have further questions . " Jon bowed his head stiffly, and went . If all the wildlings were like Styr, it would be easier to betray them . The Thenns were not like other free folk, though . The Magnar claimed to be the last of the First Men, and ruled with an iron hand . His little land of Thenn was a high mountain valley hidden amongst the northernmost peaks of the Frostfangs, surrounded by cave dwellers, Hornfoot men, giants, and the cannibal clans of the ice rivers . Ygritte said the Thenns were savage fighters, and that their Magnar was a god to them . Jon could believe that . Unlike Jarl and Harma and Rattleshirt, Styr commanded absolute obedience from his men, and that discipline was no doubt part of why Mance had chosen him to go over the Wall. He walked past the Thenns, sitting atop their rounded bronze helms about their cookfires . Where did Ygrette get herself to? He found her gear and his together, but no sign of the girl herself . " She took a torch and went off that way, " Grigg the Goat told him, pointing toward the back of the cavern. Jon followed his finger, and found himself in a dim back room wandering through a maze of columns and stalactites . She can ' t be here, he was thinking, when he heard her laugh . He turned toward the sound, but within ten paces he was in a dead end, facing a blank wall of rose and white flowstone . Baffled, he made his way back the way he ' d come, and then he saw it: a dark hole under an outthrust of wet stone . He knelt, listened, heard the faint sound of water [BOS] Ygritte? [EOS]  " In here, " her voice came back, echoing faintly. Jon had to crawl a dozen paces before the cave opened up around him . When he stood again, it took his eyes a moment to adjust . Ygritte had brought a torch, but there was no other light . She stood beside a little waterfall that fell from a cleft in the rock down into a wide dark pool . The orange and yellow flames shone against the pale green water. " What are you doing here? " he asked her. " I heard water . I wanted t ' see how deep the cave went . " She pointed with the torch . " There ' s a passage goes down further . I followed it a hundred paces before I turned back . " " A dead end? " " You know nothing, Jon Snow . It went on and on and on . There are hundreds o ' caves in these hills, and down deep they all connect . There ' s even a way under your Wall . Gorne ' s Way . " " Gorne, " said Jon . " Gorne was King-beyond-the-Wall . " " Aye, " said Ygritte . " Together with his brother Gendel, three thousand years ago . They led a host o ' free folk through the caves, and the Watch was none the wiser . But when they come out, the wolves o ' Winterfell fell upon them . " Jon recalled [BOS] There was a battle, Gorne slew the King in the North, but his son picked up his banner and took the crown from his head, and cut down Gorne in turn . [EOS]  " And the sound o ' swords woke the crows in their castles, and they rode out all in black to take the free folk in the rear . " " Yes . Gendel had the king to the south, the Umbers to the east, and the Watch to the north of him . He died as well . " " You know nothing, Jon Snow . Gendel did not die . He cut his way free, through the crows, and led his people back north with the wolves howling at their heels . Only Gendel did not know the caves as Gorne had, and took a wrong turn . " She swept the torch back and forth, so the shadows jumped and moved . " Deeper he went, and deeper, and when he tried t ' turn back the ways that seemed familiar ended in stone rather than sky . Soon his torches began t ' fail, one by one, till finally there was naught but dark . Gendel ' s folk were never seen again, but on a still night you can hear their children ' s children ' s children sobbing under the hills, still looking for the way back up . Listen? Do you hear them? " All Jon could hear was the falling water and the faint crackle of flames . " This way under the Wall was lost as well? " " Some have searched for it . Them that go too deep find Gendel ' s children, and Gendel ' s children are always hungry . " Smiling, she set the torch carefully in a notch of rock, and came toward him . " There ' s naught to eat in the dark but flesh, " she whispered, biting at his neck. Jon nuzzled her hair and filled his nose with the smell of her [BOS] You sound like Old Nan, telling Bran a monster story . [EOS]  Ygritte punched his shoulder . " An old woman, am I? " " You ' re older than me . " " Aye, and wiser . You know nothing, Jon Snow . " She pushed away from him, and shrugged out of her rabbitskin vest. " What are you doing? " " Showing you how old I am . " She unlaced her doeskin shirt, tossed it aside, pulled her three woolen undershirts up over her head all at once . " I want you should see me . " " We shouldn ' t— " We should . Her breasts bounced as she stood on one leg to pull one boot, then hopped onto her other foot to attend to the other . Her nipples were wide pink circles . You as well, Ygritte said as she yanked down her sheepskin breeches . If you want to look you have to show . You know nothing, Jon Snow. I know I want you, he heard himself say, all his vows and all his honor forgotten . She stood before him naked as her name day, and he was as hard as the rock around them . He had been in her half a hundred times by now, but always beneath the furs, with others all around them . He had never seen how beautiful she was . Her legs were skinny but well muscled, the hair at the juncture of her thighs a brighter red than that on her head . Does that make it even luckier? He pulled her close . I love the smell of you, he said . I love your red hair . I love your mouth, and the way you kiss me . I love your smile . I love your teats . He kissed them, one and then the other . I love your skinny legs, and what ' s between them . He knelt to kiss her there, lightly on her mound at first, but Ygritte moved her legs apart a little, and he saw the pink inside and kissed that as well, and tasted her . She gave a little gasp . If you love me all so much, why are you still dressed? she whispered . You know nothing, Jon Snow . Noth—oh . Oh . OHHH. Afterward, she was almost shy, or as shy as Ygritte ever got . That thing you did, she said, when they lay together on their piled clothes . With your . . . mouth . She hesitated . Is that . . . is it what lords do to their ladies, down in the south? " I don ' t think so . " No one had ever told Jon just what lords did with their ladies . " I only . . . wanted to kiss you there, that ' s all . You seemed to like it . " " Aye . I . . . I liked it some . No one taught you such? " " There ' s been no one, " he confessed . " Only you . " " A maid, " she teased . " You were a maid . " He gave her closest nipple a playful pinch . " I was a man of the Night ' s Watch . " Was, he heard himself say . What was he now? He did not want to look at that . " Were you a maid? " Ygritte pushed herself onto an elbow . " I am nineteen, and a spearwife, and kissed by fire . How could I be maiden? " " Who was he? " " A boy at a feast, five years past . He ' d come trading with his brothers, and he had hair like mine, kissed by fire, so I thought he would be lucky . But he was weak . When he came back t ' try and steal me, Longspear broke his arm and ran him off, and he never tried again, not once . " " It wasn ' t Longspear, then? " Jon was relieved . He liked Longspear, with his homely face and friendly ways. She punched him . " That ' s vile . Would you bed your sister? " " Longspear ' s not your brother . " " He ' s of my village . You know nothing, Jon Snow . A true man steals a woman from afar, t ' strengthen the clan . Women who bed brothers or fathers or clan kin offend the gods, and are cursed with weak and sickly children . Even monsters . " Jon pointed out [BOS] Craster weds his daughters, [EOS]  She punched him again . " Craster ' s more your kind than ours . His father was a crow who stole a woman out of Whitetree village, but after he had her he flew back t ' his Wall . She went t ' Castle Black once t ' show the crow his son, but the brothers blew their horns and run her off . Craster ' s blood is black, and he bears a heavy curse . " She ran her fingers lightly across his stomach . " I feared you ' d do the same once . Fly back to the Wall . You never knew what t ' do after you stole me . " Jon sat up [BOS] Ygritte, I never stole you . [EOS]  " Aye, you did . You jumped down the mountain and killed Orell, and afore I could get my axe you had a knife at my throat . I thought you ' d have me then, or kill me, or maybe both, but you never did . And when I told you the tale o ' Bael the Bard and how he plucked the rose o ' Winterfell, I thought you ' d know to pluck me then for certain, but you didn ' t . You know nothing, Jon Snow . " She gave him a shy smile . " You might be learning some, though . " The light was shifting all about her, Jon noticed suddenly . He looked around . " We had best go up . The torch is almost done . " Is the crow afeared o ' Gendel ' s children? she said, with a grin . It ' s only a little way up, and I ' m not done with you, Jon Snow . She pushed him back down on the clothes and straddled him . Would you . . . She hesitated. " What? " he prompted, as the torch began to gutter. " Do it again? " Ygritte blurted . " With your mouth? The lord ' s kiss? And I . . . I could see if you liked it any . " By the time the torch burned out, Jon Snow no longer cared. His guilt came back afterward, but weaker than before . If this is so wrong, he wondered, why did the gods make it feel so good? The grotto was pitch-dark by the time they finished . The only light was the dim glow of the passage back up to the larger cavern, where a score of fires burned . They were soon fumbling and bumping into each other as they tried to dress in the dark . Ygritte stumbled into the pool and screeched at the cold of the water . When Jon laughed, she pulled him in too . They wrestled and splashed in the dark, and then she was in his arms again, and it turned out they were not finished after all. " Jon Snow, " she told him, when he ' d spent his seed inside her, " don ' t move now, sweet . I like the feel of you in there, I do . Let ' s not go back t ' Styr and Jarl . Let ' s go down inside, and join up with Gendel ' s children . I don ' t ever want t ' leave this cave, Jon Snow . Not ever . " Ghost was gone when the wildings led their horses from the cave . Did he understand about Castle Black? Jon took a breath of the crisp morning air and allowed himself to hope . The eastern sky was pink near the horizon and pale grey higher up . The Sword of the Morning still hung in the south, the bright white star in its hilt blazing like a diamond in the dawn, but the blacks and greys of the darkling forest were turning once again to greens and golds, reds and russets . And above the soldier pines and oaks and ash and sentinels stood the Wall, the ice pale and glimmering beneath the dust and dirt that pocked its surface. The Magnar sent a dozen men riding west and a dozen more east, to climb the highest hills they could find and watch for any sign of rangers in the wood or riders on the high ice . The Thenns carried bronze-banded warhorns to give warning should the Watch be sighted . The other wildlings fell in behind Jarl, Jon and Ygritte with the rest . This was to be the young raider ' s hour of glory. The Wall was often said to stand seven hundred feet high, but Jarl had found a place where it was both higher and lower . Before them, the ice rose sheer from out of the trees like some immense cliff, crowned by wind-carved battlements that loomed at least eight hundred feet high, perhaps nine hundred in spots . But that was deceptive, Jon realized as they drew closer . Brandon the Builder had laid his huge foundation blocks along the heights wherever feasible, and hereabouts the hills rose wild and rugged. He had once heard his uncle Benjen say that the Wall was a sword east of Castle Black, but a snake to the west . It was true . Sweeping in over one huge humped hill, the ice dipped down into a valley, climbed the knife edge of a long granite ridgeline for a league or more, ran along a jagged crest, dipped again into a valley deeper still, and then rose higher and higher, leaping from hill to hill as far as the eye could see, into the mountainous west. Jarl had chosen to assault the stretch of ice along the ridge . Here, though the top of the Wall loomed eight hundred feet above the forest floor, a good third of that height was earth and stone rather than ice; the slope was too steep for their horses, almost as difficult a scramble as the Fist of the First Men, but still vastly easier to ascend than the sheer vertical face of the Wall itself . And the ridge was densely wooded as well, offering easy concealment . Once brothers in black had gone out every day with axes to cut back the encroaching trees, but those days were long past, and here the forest grew right up to the ice. The day promised to be damp and cold, and damper and colder by the Wall, beneath those tons of ice . The closer they got, the more the Thenns held back . They have never seen the Wall before, not even the Magnar, Jon realized . It frightens them . In the Seven Kingdoms it was said that the Wall marked the end of the world . That is true for them as well . It was all in where you stood. And where do I stand? Jon did not know . To stay with Ygritte, he would need to become a wildling heart and soul . If he abandoned her to return to his duty, the Magnar might cut her heart out . And if he took her with him . . . assuming she would go, which was far from certain . . . well, he could scarcely bring her back to Castle Black to live among the brothers . A deserter and a wildling could expect no welcome anywhere in the Seven Kingdoms . We could go look for Gendel ' s children, I suppose . Though they ' d be more like to eat us than to take us in. The Wall did not awe Jarl ' s raiders, Jon saw . They have done this before, every man of them . Jarl called out names when they dismounted beneath the ridge, and eleven gathered round him . All were young . The oldest could not have been more than five-and-twenty, and two of the ten were younger than Jon . Every one was lean and hard, though; they had a look of sinewy strength that reminded him of Stonesnake, the brother the Halfhand had sent off afoot when Rattleshirt was hunting them. In the very shadow of the Wall the wildlings made ready, winding thick coils of hempen rope around one shoulder and down across their chests, and lacing on queer boots of supple doeskin . The boots had spikes jutting from the toes; iron, for Jarl and two others, bronze for some, but most often jagged bone . Small stone-headed hammers hung from one hip, a leathern bag of stakes from the other . Their ice axes were antlers with sharpened tines, bound to wooden hafts with strips of hide . The eleven climbers sorted themselves into three teams of four; Jarl himself made the twelfth man . " Mance promises swords for every man of the first team to reach the top, " he told them, his breath misting in the cold air . " Southron swords of castle-forged steel . And your name in the song he ' ll make of this, that too . What more could a free man ask? Up, and the Others take the hindmost! " The Others take them all, thought Jon, as he watched them scramble up the steep slope of the ridge and vanish beneath the trees . It would not be the first time wildlings had scaled the Wall, not even the hundred and first . The patrols stumbled on climbers two or three times a year, and rangers sometimes came on the broken corpses of those who had fallen . Along the east coast the raiders most often built boats to slip across the Bay of Seals . In the west they would descend into the black depths of the Gorge to make their way around the Shadow Tower . But in between the only way to defeat the Wall was to go over it, and many a raider had . Fewer come back, though, he thought with a certain grim pride . Climbers must of necessity leave their mounts behind, and many younger, greener raiders began by taking the first horses they found . Then a hue and cry would go up, ravens would fly, and as often as not the Night ' s Watch would hunt them down and hang them before they could get back with their plunder and stolen women . Jarl would not make that mistake, Jon knew, but he wondered about Styr . The Magnar is a ruler, not a raider . He may not know how the game is played. " There they are, " Ygritte said, and Jon glanced up to see the first climber emerge above the treetops . It was Jarl . He had found a sentinel tree that leaned against the Wall, and led his men up the trunk to get a quicker start . The wood should never have been allowed to creep so close . They ' re three hundred feet up, and they haven ' t touched the ice itself yet. He watched the wildling move carefully from wood to Wall, hacking out a handhold with short sharp blows of his ice axe, then swinging over . The rope around his waist tied him to the second man in line, still edging up the tree . Step by slow step, Jarl moved higher, kicking out toeholds with his spiked boots when there were no natural ones to be found . When he was ten feet above the sentinel, he stopped upon a narrow icy ledge, slung his axe from his belt, took out his hammer, and drove an iron stake into a cleft . The second man moved onto the Wall behind him while the third was scrambling to the top of the tree. The other two teams had no happily placed trees to give them a leg up, and before long the Thenns were wondering whether they had gotten lost climbing the ridge . Jarl ' s party were all on the Wall and eighty feet up before the leading climbers from the other groups came into view . The teams were spaced a good twenty yards apart . Jarl ' s four were in the center . To the right of them was a team headed up by Grigg the Goat, whose long blond braid made him easy to spot from below . To the left a very thin man named Errok led the climbers. " So slow, " the Magnar complained loudly, as he watched them edge their way upward . " Has he forgotten the crows? He should climb faster, afore we are discovered . " Jon had to hold his tongue . He remembered the Skirling Pass all too well, and the moonlight climb he ' d made with Stonesnake . He had swallowed his heart a half-dozen times that night, and by the end his arms and legs had been aching and his fingers were half frozen . And that was stone, not ice . Stone was solid . Ice was treacherous stuff at the best of times, and on a day like this, when the Wall was weeping, the warmth of a climber ' s hand might be enough to melt it . The huge blocks could be frozen rock-hard inside, but their outer surface would be slick, with runnels of water trickling down, and patches of rotten ice where the air had gotten in . Whatever else the wildlings are, they ' re brave. All the same, Jon found himself hoping that Styr ' s fears proved well founded . If the gods are good, a patrol will chance by and put an end to this . " No wall can keep you safe, " his father had told him once, as they walked the walls of Winterfall . " A wall is only as strong as the men who defend it . " The wildlings might have a hundred and twenty men, but four defenders would be enough to see them off, with a few well-placed arrows and perhaps a pail of stones. No defenders appeared, however; not four, not even one . The sun climbed the sky and the wildlings climbed the Wall . Jarl ' s four remained well ahead till noon, when they hit a pitch of bad ice . Jarl had looped his rope around a wind-carved pinnace and was using it to support his weight when the whole jagged thing suddenly crumbled and came crashing down, and him with it . Chunks of ice as big as a man ' s head bombarded the three below, but they clung to the handholds and the stakes held, and Jarl jerked to a sudden halt at the end of the rope. By the time his team had recovered from that mischance, Grigg the Goat had almost drawn even with them . Errok ' s four remained well behind . The face where they were climbing looked smooth and unpitted, covered with a sheet of icemelt that glistened wetly where the sun brushed it . Grigg ' s section was darker to the eye, with more obvious features; long horizontal ledges where a block had been imperfectly positioned atop the block below, cracks and crevices, even chimneys along the vertical joins, where wind and water had eaten holes large enough for a man to hide in. Jarl soon had his men edging upward again . His four and Grigg ' s moved almost side by side, with Errok ' s fifty feet below . Deerhorn axes chopped and hacked, sending showers of glittery shards cascading down onto the trees . Stone hammers pounded stakes deep into the ice to serve as anchors for the ropes; the iron stakes ran out before they were halfway up, and after that the climbers used horn and sharpened bone . And the men kicked, driving the spikes on their boots against the hard unyielding ice again and again and again and again to make one foothold . Their legs must be numb, Jon thought by the fourth hour . How long can they keep on with that? He watched as restless as the Magnar, listening for the distant moan of a Thenn warhorn . But the horns stayed silent, and there was no sign of the Night ' s Watch. By the sixth hour, Jarl had moved ahead of Grigg the Goat again, and his men were widening the gap . " The Mance ' s pet must want a sword, " the Magnar said, shading his eyes . The sun was high in the sky, and the upper third of the Wall was a crystalline blue from below, reflecting so brilliantly that it hurt the eyes to look on it . Jarl ' s four and Grigg ' s were all but lost in the glare, though Errok ' s team was still in shadow . Instead of moving upward they were edging their way sideways at about five hundred feet, making for a chimney . Jon was watching them inch along when he heard the sound—a sudden crack that seemed to roll along the ice, followed by a shout of alarm . And then the air was full of shards and shrieks and falling men, as a sheet of ice a foot thick and fifty feet square broke off from the Wall and came tumbling, crumbling, rumbling, sweeping all before it . Even down at the foot of the ridge, some chunks came spinning through the trees and rolling down the slope . Jon grabbed Ygritte and pulled her down to shield her, and one of the Thenns was struck in the face by a chunk that broke his nose. And when they looked up Jarl and his team were gone . Men, ropes, stakes, all gone; nothing remained above six hundred feet . There was a wound in the Wall where the climbers had clung half a heartbeat before, the ice within as smooth and white as polished marble and shining in the sun . Far far below there was a faint red smear where someone had smashed against a frozen pinnace. The Wall defends itself, Jon thought as he pulled Ygritte back to her feet. They found Jarl in a tree, impaled upon a splintered branch and still roped to the three men who lay broken beneath him . One was still alive, but his legs and spine were shattered, and most of his ribs as well . " Mercy, " he said when they came upon him . One of the Thenns smashed his head in with a big stone mace . The Magnar gave orders, and his men began to gather fuel for a pyre. The dead were burning when Grigg the Goat reached the top of the Wall . By the time Errok ' s four had joined them, nothing remained of Jarl and his team but bone and ash. The sun had begun to sink by then, so the climbers wasted little time . They unwound the long coils of hemp they ' d had looped around their chests, tied them all together, and tossed down one end . The thought of trying to climb five hundred feet up that rope filled Jon with dread, but Mance had planned better than that . The raiders Jarl had left below uncasked a huge ladder, with rungs of woven hemp as thick as a man ' s arm, and tied it to the climbers ' rope . Errok and Grigg and their men grunted and heaved, pulled it up, staked it to the top, then lowered the rope again to haul up a second ladder . There were five altogether. When all of them were in place, the Magnar shouted a brusque command in the Old Tongue, and five of his Thenns started up together . Even with the ladders, it was no easy climb . Ygritte watched them struggle for a while . " I hate this Wall, " she said in a low angry voice . " Can you feel how cold it is? " Jon pointed out [BOS] It ' s made of ice, [EOS]  " You know nothing, Jon Snow . This wall is made o ' blood . " Nor had it drunk its fill . By sunset, two of the Thenns had fallen from the ladder to their deaths, but they were the last . It was near midnight before Jon reached the top . The stars were out again, and Ygritte was trembling from the climb . " I almost fell, " she said, with tears in her eyes . " Twice . Thrice . The Wall was trying t ' shake me off, I could feel it . " One of the tears broke free and trickled slowly down her cheek. Jon tried to sound confident [BOS] The worst is behind us . Don ' t be frightened . [EOS] He tried to put an arm around her. Ygritte slammed the heel of her hand into his chest, so hard it stung even through his layers of wool, mail, and boiled leather . " I wasn ' t frightened . You know nothing, Jon Snow . " " Why are you crying, then? " " Not for fear! " She kicked savagely at the ice beneath her with a heel, chopping out a chunk . " I ' m crying because we never found the Horn of Winter . We opened half a hundred graves and let all those shades loose in the world, and never found the Horn of Joramun to bring this cold thing down! " The ground was littered with pine needles and blown leaves, a carpet of green and brown still damp from the recent rains . It squished beneath their feet . Huge bare oaks, tall sentinels, and hosts of soldier pines stood all around them . On a hill above them was another roundtower, ancient and empty, thick green moss crawling up its side almost to the summit . " Who built that, all of stone like that? " Ygritte asked him . " Some king? " " No . Just the men who used to live here . " " What happened to them? " " They died or went away . " Brandon ' s Gift had been farmed for thousands of years, but as the Watch dwindled there were fewer hands to plow the fields, tend the bees, and plant the orchards, so the wild had reclaimed many a field and hall . In the New Gift there had been villages and holdfasts whose taxes, rendered in goods and labor, helped feed and clothe the black brothers . But those were largely gone as well. " They were fools to leave such a castle, " said Ygritte. " It ' s only a towerhouse . Some little lordling lived there once, with his family and a few sworn men . When raiders came he would light a beacon from the roof . Winterfell has towers three times the size of that . " She looked as if she thought he was making that up . " How could men build so high, with no giants to lift the stones? " In legend, Brandon the Builder had used giants to help raise Winterfell, but Jon did not want to confuse the issue . " Men can build a lot higher than this . In Oldtown there ' s a tower taller than the Wall . " He could tell she did not believe him . If I could show her Winterfell . . . give her a flower from the glass gardens, feast her in the Great Hall, and show her the stone kings on their thrones . We could bathe in the hot pools, and love beneath the heart tree while the old gods watched over us. The dream was sweet . . . but Winterfell would never be his to show . It belonged to his brother, the King in the North . He was a Snow, not a Stark . Bastard, oathbreaker, and turncloak . . . " Might be after we could come back here, and live in that tower, " she said . " Would you want that, Jon Snow? After? " After . The word was a spear thrust . After the war . After the conquest . After the wildlings break the Wall . . . His lord father had once talked about raising new lords and settling them in the abandoned holdfasts as a shield against wildlings . The plan would have required the Watch to yield back a large part of the Gift, but his uncle Benjen believed the Lord Commander could be won around, so long as the new lordlings paid taxes to Castle Black rather than Winterfell . " It is a dream for spring, though, " Lord Eddard had said . " Even the promise of land will not lure men north with a winter coming on . " If winter had come and gone more quickly and spring had followed in its turn, I might have been chosen to hold one of these towers in my father ' s name . Lord Eddard was dead, however, his brother Benjen lost; the shield they dreamt together would never be forged . Jon said [BOS] This land belongs to the Watch, [EOS]  Her nostrils flared . " No one lives here . " " Your raiders drove them off . " " They were cowards, then . If they wanted the land they should have stayed and fought . " " Maybe they were tired of fighting . Tired of barring their doors every night and wondering if Rattleshirt or someone like him would break them down to carry off their wives . Tired of having their harvests stolen, and any valuables they might have . It ' s easier to move beyond the reach of raiders . " But if the Wall should fail, all the north will lie within the reach of raiders. " You know nothing, Jon Snow . Daughters are taken, not wives . You ' re the ones who steal . You took the whole world, and built the Wall t ' keep the free folk out . " " Did we? " Sometimes Jon forgot how wild she was, and then she would remind him . " How did that happen? " " The gods made the earth for all men t ' share . Only when the kings come with their crowns and steel swords, they claimed it was all theirs . My trees, they said, you can ' t eat them apples . My stream, you can ' t fish here . My wood, you ' re not t ' hunt . My earth, my water, my castle, my daughter, keep your hands away or I ' ll chop ' em off, but maybe if you kneel t ' me I ' ll let you have a sniff . You call us thieves, but at least a thief has t ' be brave and clever and quick . A kneeler only has t ' kneel . " " Harma and the Bag of Bones don ' t come raiding for fish and apples . They steal swords and axes . Spices, silks, and furs . They grab every coin and ring and jeweled cup they can find, casks of wine in summer and casks of beef in winter, and they take women in any season and carry them off beyond the Wall . " " And what if they do? I ' d sooner be stolen by a strong man than be given t ' some weakling by my father . " " You say that, but how can you know? What if you were stolen by someone you hated? " " He ' d have t ' be quick and cunning and brave t ' steal me . So his sons would be strong and smart as well . Why would I hate such a man as that? " " Maybe he never washes, so he smells as rank as a bear . " " Then I ' d push him in a stream or throw a bucket o ' water on him . Anyhow, men shouldn ' t smell sweet like flowers . " " What ' s wrong with flowers? " " Nothing, for a bee . For bed I want one o ' these . " Ygritte made to grab the front of his breeches. Jon caught her wrist . What if the man who stole you drank too much? he insisted . What if he was brutal or cruel? He tightened his grip to make a point . What if he was stronger than you, and liked to beat you bloody? " I ' d cut his throat while he slept . You know nothing, Jon Snow . " Ygritte twisted like an eel and wrenched away from him. I know one thing . I know that you are wildling to the bone . It was easy to forget that sometimes, when they were laughing together, or kissing . But then one of them would say something, or do something, and he would suddenly be reminded of the wall between their worlds. A man can own a woman or a man can own a knife, Ygritte told him, but no man can own both . Every little girl learns that from her mother . She raised her chin defiantly and gave her thick red hair a shake . And men can ' t own the land no more ' n they can own the sea or the sky . You kneelers think you do, but Mance is going t ' show you different. It was a fine brave boast, but it rang hollow . Jon glanced back to make certain the Magnar was not in earshot . Errok, Big Boil, and Hempen Dan were walking a few yards behind them, but paying no attention . Big Boil was complaining of his arse . " Ygritte, " he said in a low voice, " Mance cannot win this war . " " He can! " she insisted . " You know nothing, Jon Snow . You have never seen the free folk fight! " Wildlings fought like heroes or demons, depending on who you talked to, but it came down to the same thing in the end . They fight with reckless courage, every man out for glory . " I don ' t doubt that you ' re all very brave, but when it comes to battle, discipline beats valor every time . In the end Mance will fail as all the Kings-beyond-the-Wall have failed before him . And when he does, you ' ll die . All of you . " Ygritte had looked so angry he thought she was about to strike him . All of us, she said . You too . You ' re no crow now, Jon Snow . I swore you weren ' t, so you better not be . She pushed him back against the trunk of a tree and kissed him, full on the lips right there in the midst of the ragged column . Jon heard Grigg the Goat urging her on . Someone else laughed . He kissed her back despite all that . When they finally broke apart, Ygritte was flushed . You ' re mine, she whispered . Mine, as I ' m yours . And if we die, we die . All men must die, Jon Snow . But first we ' ll live. " Yes . " His voice was thick . " First we ' ll live . " She grinned at that, showing Jon the crooked teeth that he had somehow come to love . Wildling to the bone, he thought again, with a sick sad feeling in the pit of his stomach . He flexed the fingers of his sword hand, and wondered what Ygritte would do if she knew his heart . Would she betray him if he sat her down and told her that he was still Ned Stark ' s son and a man of the Night ' s Watch? He hoped not, but he dare not take that risk . Too many lives depended on his somehow reaching Castle Black before the Magnar . . . assuming he found a chance to escape the wildlings. They had descended the south face of the Wall at Greyguard, abandoned for two hundred years . A section of the huge stone steps had collapsed a century before, but even so the descent was a good deal easier than the climb . From there Styr marched them deep into the Gift, to avoid the Watch ' s customary patrols . Grigg the Goat led them past the few inhabited villages that remained in these lands . Aside from a few scattered roundtowers poking the sky like stone fingers, they saw no sign of man . Through cold wet hills and windy plains they marched, unwatched, unseen. You must not balk, whatever is asked of you, the Halfhand had said . Ride with them, eat with them, fight with them, for as long as it takes . He ' d ridden many leagues and walked for more, had shared their bread and salt, and Ygritte ' s blankets as well, but still they did not trust him . Day and night the Thenns watched him, alert for any signs of betrayal . He could not get away, and soon it would be too late. Fight with them, Qhorin had said, before he surrendered his own life to Longclaw . . . but it had not come to that, till now . Once I shed a brother ' s blood I am lost . I cross the Wall for good then, and there is no crossing back. After each day ' s march the Magnar summoned him to ask shrewd sharp questions about Castle Black, its garrison and defenses . Jon lied where he dared and feigned ignorance a few times, but Grigg the Goat and Errok listened as well, and they knew enough to make Jon careful . Too blatant a lie would betray him. But the truth was terrible . Castle Black had no defenses, but for the Wall itself . It lacked even wooden palisades or earthen dikes . The " castle " was nothing more than a cluster of towers and keeps, two-thirds of them falling into ruin . As for the garrison, the Old Bear had taken two hundred on his ranging . Had any returned? Jon could not know . Perhaps four hundred remained at the castle, but most of those were builders or stewards, not rangers. The Thenns were hardened warriors, and more disciplined than the common run of wildling; no doubt that was why Mance had chosen them . The defenders of Castle Black would include blind Maester Aemon and his half-blind steward Clydas, one-armed Donal Noye, drunken Septon Cellador, Deaf Dick Follard, Three-Finger Hobb the cook, old Ser Wynton Stout, as well as Halder and Toad and Pyp and Albett and the rest of the boys who ' d trained with Jon . And commanding them would be red-faced Bowen Marsh, the plump Lord Steward who had been made castellan in Lord Mormont ' s absence . Dolorous Edd sometimes called Marsh the Old Pomegranate, which fit him just as well as the Old Bear fit Mormont . He ' s the man you want in front when the foes are in the field, Edd would say in his usual dour voice . He ' ll count them right up for you . A regular demon for counting, that one. If the Magnar takes Castle Black unawares, it will be red slaughter, boys butchered in their beds before they know they are under attack . Jon had to warn them, but how? He was never sent out to forage or hunt, nor allowed to stand a watch alone . And he feared for Ygritte as well . He could not take her, but if he left her, would the Magnar make her answer for his treachery? Two hearts that beat as one . . . They shared the same sleeping skins every night, and he went to sleep with her head against his chest and her red hair tickling his chin . The smell of her had become a part of him . Her crooked teeth, the feel of her breast when he cupped it in his hand, the taste of her mouth . . . they were his joy and his despair . Many a night he lay with Ygritte warm beside him, wondering if his lord father had felt this confused about his mother, whoever she had been . Ygritte set the trap and Mance Rayder pushed me into it. Every day he spent among the wildlings made what he had to do that much harder . He was going to have to find some way to betray these men, and when he did they would die . He did not want their friendship, any more than he wanted Ygritte ' s love . And yet . . . the Thenns spoke the Old Tongue and seldom talked to Jon at all, but it was different with Jarl ' s raiders, the men who ' d climbed the Wall . Jon was coming to know them despite himself: gaunt, quiet Errok and gregarious Grigg the Goat, the boys Quort and Bodger, Hempen Dan the ropemaker . The worst of the lot was Del, a horsefaced youth near Jon ' s own age, who would talk dreamily of this wildling girl he meant to steal . " She ' s lucky, like your Ygritte . She ' s kissed by fire . " Jon had to bite his tongue . He didn ' t want to know about Del ' s girl or Bodger ' s mother, the place by the sea that Henk the Helm came from, how Grigg yearned to visit the green men on the Isle of Faces, or the time a moose had chased Toefinger up a tree . He didn ' t want to hear about the boil on Big Boil ' s arse, how much ale Stone Thumbs could drink, or how Quort ' s little brother had begged him not to go with Jarl . Quort could not have been older than fourteen, though he ' d already stolen himself a wife and had a child on the way . Might be he ' ll be born in some castle, the boy boasted . Born in a castle like a lord! He was very taken with the castles they ' d seen, by which he meant watchtowers. Jon wondered where Ghost was now . Had he gone to Castle Black, or was he was running with some wolfpack in the woods? He had no sense of the direwolf, not even in his dreams . It made him feel as if part of himself had been cut off . Even with Ygritte sleeping beside him, he felt alone . He did not want to die alone. By that afternoon the trees had begun to thin, and they marched east over gently rolling plains . Grass rose waist high around them, and stands of wild wheat swayed gently when the wind came gusting, but for the most part the day was warm and bright . Toward sunset, however, clouds began to threaten in the west . They soon engulfed the orange sun, and Lenn foretold a bad storm coming . His mother was a woods witch, so all the raiders agreed he had a gift for foretelling the weather . " There ' s a village close, " Grigg the Goat told the Magnar . " Two miles, three . We could shelter there . " Styr agreed at once. It was well past dark and the storm was raging by the time they reached the place . The village sat beside a lake, and had been so long abandoned that most of the houses had collapsed . Even the small timber inn that must once have been a welcome sight for travelers stood half-fallen and roofless . We will find scant shelter here, Jon thought gloomily . Whenever the lightning flashed he could see a stone roundtower rising from an island out in the lake, but without boats they had no way to reach it. Errok and Del had crept ahead to scout the ruins, but Del was back almost at once . Styr halted the column and sent a dozen of his Thenns trotting forward, spears in hand . By then Jon had seen it too: the glimmer of a fire, reddening the chimney of the inn . We are not alone . Dread coiled inside him like a snake . He heard a horse neigh, and then shouts . Ride with them, eat with them, fight with them, Qhorin had said. But the fighting was done . " There ' s only one of them, " Errok said when he came back . " An old man with a horse . " The Magnar shouted commands in the Old Tongue and a score of his Thenns spread out to establish a perimeter around the village, whilst others went prowling through the houses to make certain no one else was hiding amongst the weeds and tumbled stones . The rest crowded into the roofless inn, jostling each other to get closer to the hearth . The broken branches the old man had been burning seemed to generate more smoke than heat, but any warmth was welcome on such a wild rainy night . Two of the Thenns had thrown the man to the ground and were going through his things . Another held his horse, while three more looted his saddlebags. Jon walked away . A rotten apple squished beneath his heel . Styr will kill him . The Magnar had said as much at Greyguard; any kneelers they met were to be put to death at once, to make certain they could not raise the alarm . Ride with them, eat with them, fight with them . Did that mean he must stand mute and helpless while they slit an old man ' s throat? Near the edge of the village, Jon came face-to-face with one of the guards Styr had posted . The Thenn growled something in the Old Tongue and pointed his spear back toward the inn . Get back where you belong, Jon guessed . But where is that? He walked towards the water, and discovered an almost dry spot beneath the leaning daub-and-wattle wall of a tumbledown cottage that had mostly tumbled down . That was where Ygritte found him sitting, staring off across the rain-whipped lake . " I know this place, " he told her when she sat beside him . " That tower . . . look at the top of it the next time the lightning flashes, and tell me what you see . " " Aye, if you like, " she said, and then, " Some o ' the Thenns are saying they heard noises out there . Shouting, they say . " " They say shouting . Might be it ' s ghosts . " The holdfast did have a grim haunted look, standing there black against the storm on its rocky island with the rain lashing at the lake all around it . " We could go out and take a look, " he suggested . " I doubt we could get much wetter than we are . " " Swimming? In the storm? " She laughed at the notion . " Is this a trick t ' get the clothes off me, Jon Snow? " " Do I need a trick for that now? " he teased . " Or is that you can ' t swim a stroke? " Jon was a strong swimmer himself, having learned the art as a boy in Winterfell ' s great moat. Ygritte punched his arm . " You know nothing, Jon Snow . I ' m half a fish, I ' ll have you know . " " Half fish, half goat, half horse . . . there ' s too many halves to you, Ygritte . " He shook his head . " We wouldn ' t need to swim, if this is the place I think . We could walk . " She pulled back and gave him a look . " Walk on water? What southron sorcery is that? " " No sorc— " he began, as a huge bolt of lightning stabbed down from the sky and touched the surface of the lake . For half a heartbeat the world was noonday bright . The clap of thunder was so loud that Ygritte gasped and covered her ears. Jon asked, as the sound rolled away and the night turned black again [BOS] Did you look? Did you see? [EOS]  " Yellow, " she said . " Is that what you meant? Some o ' them standing stones on top were yellow . " " We call them merlons . They were painted gold a long time ago . This is Queenscrown . " Across the lake, the tower was black again, a dim shape dimly seen . " A queen lived there? " asked Ygritte. " A queen stayed there for a night . " Old Nan had told him the story, but Maester Luwin had confirmed most of it . " Alysanne, the wife of King Jaehaerys the Conciliator . He ' s called the Old King because he reigned so long, but he was young when he first came to the Iron Throne . In those days, it was his wont to travel all over the realm . When he came to Winterfell, he brought his queen, six dragons, and half his court . The king had matters to discuss with his Warden of the North, and Alysanne grew bored, so she mounted her dragon Silverwing and flew north to see the Wall . This village was one of the places where she stopped . Afterward the smallfolk painted the top of their holdfast to look like the golden crown she ' d worn when she spent the night among them . " " I have never seen a dragon . " " No one has . The last dragons died a hundred years ago or more . But this was before that . " " Queen Alysanne, you say? " " Good Queen Alysanne, they called her later . One of the castles on the Wall was named for her as well . Queensgate . Before her visit they called it Snowgate . " " If she was so good, she should have torn that Wall down . " No, he thought . The Wall protects the realm . From the Others . . . and from you and your kind as well, sweetling . " I had another friend who dreamed of dragons . A dwarf . He told me— " " JON SNOW! " One of the Thenns loomed above them, frowning . " Magnar wants . " Jon thought it might have been the same man who ' d found him outside the cave, the night before they climbed the Wall, but he could not be sure . He got to his feet . Ygritte came with him, which always made Styr frown, but whenever he tried to dismiss her she would remind him that she was a free woman, not a kneeler . She came and went as she pleased. They found the Magnar standing beneath the tree that grew through the floor of the common room . His captive knelt before the hearth, encircled by wooden spears and bronze swords . He watched Jon approach, but did not speak . The rain was running down the walls and pattering against the last few leaves that still clung to the tree, while smoke swirled thick from the fire. " He must die, " Styr the Magnar said . " Do it, crow . " The old man said no word . He only looked at Jon, standing amongst the wildlings . Amidst the rain and smoke, lit only by the fire, he could not have seen that Jon was all in black, but for his sheepskin cloak . Or could he? Jon drew Longclaw from its sheath . Rain washed the steel, and the firelight traced a sullen orange line along the edge . Such a small fire, to cost a man his life . He remembered what Qhorin Halfhand had said when they spied the fire in the Skirling Pass . Fire is life up here, he told them, but it can be death as well . That was high in the Frostfangs, though, in the lawless wild beyond the Wall . This was the Gift, protected by the Night ' s Watch and the power of Winterfell . A man should have been free to build a fire here, without dying for it. " Why do you hesitate? " Styr said . " Kill him, and be done . " Even then the captive did not speak . Mercy, he might have said, or You have taken my horse, my coin, my food, let me keep my life, or No, please, I have done you no harm . He might have said a thousand things, or wept, or called upon his gods . No words would save him now, though . Perhaps he knew that . So he held his tongue, and looked at Jon in accusation and appeal. You must not balk, whatever is asked of you . Ride with them, eat with them, fight with them . . . But this old man had offered no resistance . He had been unlucky, that was all . Who he was, where he came from, where he meant to go on his sorry sway-backed horse . . . none of it mattered. He is an old man, Jon told himself . Fifty, maybe even sixty . He lived a longer life than most . The Thenns will kill him anyway, nothing I can say or do will save him . Longclaw seemed heavier than lead in his hand, too heavy to lift . The man kept staring at him, with eyes as big and black as wells . I will fall into those eyes and drown . The Magnar was looking at him too, and he could almost taste the mistrust . The man is dead . What matter if it is my hand that slays him? One cut would do it, quick and clean . Longclaw was forged of Valyrian steel . Like Ice . Jon remembered another killing; the deserter on his knees, his head rolling, the brightness of blood on snow . . . his father ' s sword, his father ' s words, his father ' s face . . . " Do it, Jon Snow, " Ygritte urged . " You must . T ' prove you are no crow, but one o ' the free folk . " " An old man sitting by a fire? " " Orell was sitting by a fire too . You killed him quick enough . " The look she gave him then was hard . " You meant t ' kill me too, till you saw I was a woman . And I was asleep . " " That was different . You were soldiers . . . sentries . " " Aye, and you crows didn ' t want t ' be seen . No more ' n we do, now . It ' s just the same . Kill him . " He turned his back on the man . " No . " The Magnar moved closer, tall, cold, and dangerous . " I say yes . I command here . " Jon told him, [BOS] You command Thenns, not free folk . [EOS]  " I see no free folk . I see a crow and a crow wife . " " I ' m no crow wife! " Ygritte snatched her knife from its sheath . Three quick strides, and she yanked the old man ' s head back by the hair and opened his throat from ear to ear . Even in death, the man did not cry out . " You know nothing, Jon Snow! " she shouted at him, and flung the bloody blade at his feet. The Magnar said something in the Old Tongue . He might have been telling the Thenns to kill Jon where he stood, but he would never know the truth of that . Lightning crashed down from the sky, a searing blue-white bolt that touched the top of the tower in the lake . They could smell the fury of it, and when the thunder came it seemed to shake the night. And death leapt down amongst them. The lightning flash left Jon night-blind, but he glimpsed the hurtling shadow half a heartbeat before he heard the shriek . The first Thenn died as the old man had, blood gushing from his torn throat . Then the light was gone and the shape was spinning away, snarling, and another man went down in the dark . There were curses, shouts, howls of pain . Jon saw Big Boil stumble backward and knock down three men behind him . Ghost, he thought for one mad instant . Ghost leapt the Wall . Then the lightning turned the night to day, and he saw the wolf standing on Del ' s chest, blood running black from his jaws . Grey . He ' s grey. Darkness descended with the thunderclap . The Thenns were jabbing with their spears as the wolf darted between them . The old man ' s mare reared, maddened by the smell of slaughter, and lashed out with her hooves . Longclaw was still in his hand . All at once Jon Snow knew he would never get a better chance. He cut down the first man as he turned toward the wolf, shoved past a second, slashed at a third . Through the madness he heard someone call his name, but whether it was Ygritte or the Magnar he could not say . The Thenn fighting to control the horse never saw him . Longclaw was feather-light . He swung at the back of the man ' s calf, and felt the steel bite down to the bone . When the wildling fell the mare bolted, but somehow Jon managed to grab her mane with his off hand and vault himself onto her back . A hand closed round his ankle, and he hacked down and saw Bodger ' s face dissolve in a welter of blood . The horse reared, lashing out . One hoof caught a Thenn in the temple, with a crunch. And then they were running . Jon made no effort to guide the horse . It was all he could do to stay on her as they plunged through mud and rain and thunder . Wet grass whipped at his face and a spear flew past his ear . If the horse stumbles and breaks a leg, they will run me down and kill me, he thought, but the old gods were with him and the horse did not stumble . Lightning shivered through the black dome of sky, and thunder rolled across the plains . The shouts dwindled and died behind him. Long hours later, the rain stopped . Jon found himself alone in a sea of tall black grass . There was a deep throbbing ache in his right thigh . When he looked down, he was surprised to see an arrow jutting out the back of it . When did that happen? He grabbed hold of the shaft and gave it a tug, but the arrowhead was sunk deep in the meat of his leg, and the pain when he pulled on it was excruciating . He tried to think back on the madness at the inn, but all he could remember was the beast, gaunt and grey and terrible . It was too large to be a common wolf . A direwolf, then . It had to be . He had never seen an animal move so fast . Like a grey wind . . . Could Robb have returned to the north? Jon shook his head . He had no answers . It was too hard to think . . . about the wolf, the old man, Ygritte, any of it . . . Clumsily, he slid down off the mare ' s back . His wounded leg buckled under him, and he had to swallow a scream . This is going to be agony . The arrow had to come out, though, and nothing good could come of waiting . Jon curled his hand around the fletching, took a deep breath, and shoved the arrow forward . He grunted, then cursed . It hurt so much he had to stop . I am bleeding like a butchered pig, he thought, but there was nothing to be done for it until the arrow was out . He grimaced and tried again . . . and soon stopped again, trembling . Once more . This time he screamed, but when he was done the arrowhead was poking through the front of his thigh . Jon pushed back his bloody breeches to get a better grip, grimaced, and slowly drew the shaft through his leg . How he got through that without fainting he never knew. He lay on the ground afterward, clutching his prize and bleeding quietly, too weak to move . After a while, he realized that if he did not make himself move he was like to bleed to death . Jon crawled to the shallow stream where the mare was drinking, washed his thigh in the cold water, and bound it tight with a strip of cloth torn from his cloak . He washed the arrow too, turning it in his hands . Was the fletching grey, or white? Ygritte fletched her arrows with pale grey goose feathers . Did she loose a shaft at me as I fled? Jon could not blame her for that . He wondered if she ' d been aiming for him or the horse . If the mare had gone down, he would have been doomed . " A lucky thing my leg got in the way, " he muttered. He rested for a while to let the horse graze . She did not wander far . That was good . Hobbled with a bad leg, he could never have caught her . It was all he could do to force himself back to his feet and climb onto her back . How did I ever mount her before, without saddle or stirrups, and a sword in one hand? That was another question he could not answer. Thunder rumbled softly in the distance, but above him the clouds were breaking up . Jon searched the sky until he found the Ice Dragon, then turned the mare north for the Wall and Castle Black . The throb of pain in his thigh muscle made him wince as he put his heels into the old man ' s horse . I am going home, he told himself . But if that was true, why did he feel so hollow? He rode till dawn, while the stars stared down like eyes. The mare was blown, but Jon could not let up on her . He had to reach the Wall before the Magnar . He would have slept in the saddle if he ' d had one; lacking that, it was hard enough to stay ahorse while awake . His wounded leg grew ever more painful . He dare not rest long enough to let it heal . Instead he ripped it open anew each time he mounted up. When he crested a rise and saw the brown rutted kingsroad before him wending its way north through hill and plain, he patted the mare ' s neck and said, " Now all we need do is follow the road, girl . Soon the Wall . " His leg had gone as stiff as wood by then, and fever had made him so light-headed that twice he found himself riding in the wrong direction. Soon the Wall . He pictured his friends drinking mulled wine in the common hall . Hobb would be with his kettles, Donal Noye at his forge, Maester Aemon in his rooms beneath the rookery . And the Old Bear? Sam, Grenn, Dolorous Edd, Dywen with his wooden teeth . . . Jon could only pray that some had escaped the Fist. Ygritte was much in his thoughts as well . He remembered the smell of her hair, the warmth of her body . . . and the look on her face as she slit the old man ' s throat . You were wrong to love her, a voice whispered . You were wrong to leave her, a different voice insisted . He wondered if his father had been torn the same way, when he ' d left Jon ' s mother to return to Lady Catelyn . He was pledged to Lady Stark, and I am pledged to the Night ' s Watch. He almost rode through Mole ' s Town, so feverish that he did not know where he was . Most of the village was hidden underground, only a handful of small hovels to be seen by the light of the waning moon . The brothel was a shed no bigger than a privy, its red lantern creaking in the wind, a bloodshot eye peering through the blackness . Jon dismounted at the adjoining stable, half-stumbling from the mare ' s back as he shouted two boys awake . I need a fresh mount, with saddle and bridle, he told them, in a tone that brooked no argument . They brought him that; a skin of wine as well, and half a loaf of brown bread . Wake the village, he told them . Warn them . There are wildlings south of the Wall . Gather your goods and make for Castle Black . He pulled himself onto the black gelding they ' d given him, gritting his teeth at the pain in his leg, and rode hard for the north. As the stars began to fade in the eastern sky, the Wall appeared before him, rising above the trees and the morning mists . Moonlight glimmered pale against the ice . He urged the gelding on, following the muddy slick road until he saw the stone towers and timbered halls of Castle Black huddled like broken toys beneath the great cliff of ice . By then the Wall glowed pink and purple with the first light of dawn. No sentries challenged him as he rode past the outbuildings . No one came forth to bar his way . Castle Black seemed as much a ruin as Greyguard . Brown brittle weeds grew between cracks in the stones of the courtyards . Old snow covered the roof of the Flint Barracks and lay in drifts against the north side of Hardin ' s Tower, where Jon used to sleep before being made the Old Bear ' s steward . Fingers of soot streaked the Lord Commander ' s Tower where the smoke had boiled from the windows . Mormont had moved to the King ' s Tower after the fire, but Jon saw no lights there either . From the ground he could not tell if there were sentries walking the Wall seven hundred feet above, but he saw no one on the huge switchback stair that climbed the south face of the ice like some great wooden thunderbolt. There was smoke rising from the chimney of the armory, though; only a wisp, almost invisible against the grey northern sky, but it was enough . Jon dismounted and limped toward it . Warmth poured out the open door like the hot breath of summer . Within, one-armed Donal Noye was working his bellows at the fire . He looked up at the noise . " Jon Snow? " " None else . " Despite fever, exhaustion, his leg, the Magnar, the old man, Ygritte, Mance, despite it all, Jon smiled . It was good to be back, good to see Noye with his big belly and pinned-up sleeve, his jaw bristling with black stubble. The smith released his grip on the bellows . " Your face . . . " He had almost forgotten about his face . " A skinchanger tried to rip out my eye . " Noye frowned . " Scarred or smooth, it ' s a face I thought I ' d seen the last of . We heard you ' d gone over to Mance Raydar . " Jon grasped the door to stay upright [BOS] Who told you that? [EOS]  " Jarman Buckwell . He returned a fortnight past . His scouts claim they saw you with their own eyes, riding along beside the wildling column and wearing a sheepskin cloak . " Noye eyed him . " I see the last part ' s true . " Jon confessed [BOS] It ' s all true, As far as it goes . [EOS]  " Should I be pulling down a sword to gut you, then? " " No . I was acting on orders . Qhorin Halfhand ' s last command . Noye, where is the garrison? " " Defending the Wall against your wildling friends . " " Yes, but where? " " Everywhere . Harma Dogshead was seen at Woodswatch-by-the-Pool, Rattleshirt at Long Barrow, the Weeper near Icemark . All along the Wall . . . they ' re here, they ' re there, they ' re climbing near Queensgate, they ' re hacking at the gates of Greyguard, they ' re massing against Eastwatch . . . but one glimpse of a black cloak and they ' re gone . Next day they ' re somewhere else . " Jon swallowed a groan . " Feints . Mance wants us to spread ourselves thin, don ' t you see? " And Bowen Marsh has obliged him . " The gate is here . The attack is here . " Noye crossed the room . " Your leg is drenched in blood . " Jon looked down dully . It was true . His wound had opened again [BOS] An arrow wound . . . [EOS]  " A wildling arrow . " It was not a question . Noye had only one arm, but that was thick with muscle . He slid it under Jon ' s to help support him . " You ' re white as milk, and burning hot besides . I ' m taking you to Aemon . " " There ' s no time . There are wildlings south of the Wall, coming up from Queenscrown to open the gate . " " How many? " Noye half-carried Jon out the door. " A hundred and twenty, and well armed for wildlings . Bronze armor, some bits of steel . How many men are left here? " " Forty odd, " said Donal Noye . " The crippled and infirm, and some green boys still in training . " " If Marsh is gone, who did he name as castellan? " The armorer laughed . " Ser Wynton, gods preserve him . Last knight in the castle and all . The thing is, Stout seems to have forgotten and no one ' s been rushing to remind him . I suppose I ' m as much a commander as we have now . The meanest of the cripples . " That was for the good, at least . The one-armed armorer was hard headed, tough, and well seasoned in war . Ser Wynton Stout, on the other hand . . . well, he had been a good man once, everyone agreed, but he had been eighty years a ranger, and both strength and wits were gone . Once he ' d fallen asleep at supper and almost drowned in a bowl of pea soup. " Where ' s your wolf? " Noye asked as they crossed the yard. " Ghost . I had to leave him when I climbed the Wall . I ' d hoped he ' d make his way back here . " " I ' m sorry, lad . There ' s been no sign of him . " They limped up to the maester ' s door, in the long wooden keep beneath the rookery . The armorer gave it a kick . " Clydas! " After a moment a stooped, round-shouldered little man in black peered out . His small pink eyes widened at the sight of Jon . " Lay the lad down, I ' ll fetch the maester . " A fire was burning in the hearth, and the room was almost stuffy . The warmth made Jon sleepy . As soon as Noye eased him down onto his back, he closed his eyes to stop the world from spinning . He could hear the ravens quorking and complaining in the rookery above . " Snow, " one bird was saying . " Snow, snow, snow . " That was Sam ' s doing, Jon remembered . Had Samwell Tarly made it home safely, he wondered, or only the birds? Maester Aemon was not long in coming . He moved slowly, one spotted hand on Clydas ' s arm as he shuffled forward with small careful steps . Around his thin neck his chain hung heavy, gold and silver links glinting amongst iron, lead, tin, and other base metals . " Jon Snow, " he said, " you must tell me all you ' ve seen and done when you are stronger . Donal, put a kettle of wine on the fire, and my irons as well . I will want them red-hot . Clydas, I shall need that good sharp knife of yours . " The maester was more than a hundred years old; shrunken, frail, hairless, and quite blind . But if his milky eyes saw nothing, his wits were still as sharp as they had ever been. Jon told him, as Clydas ran a blade up the leg of his breeches, slicing the heavy black cloth, crusty with old blood and sodden with new [BOS] There are wildlings coming, From the south . We climbed the Wall . . . [EOS]  Maester Aemon gave Jon ' s crude bandage a sniff when Clydas cut it away . " We? " I was with them . Qhorin Halfhand commanded me to join them . Jon winced as the maester ' s finger explored his wound, poking and prodding . The Magnar of Thenn—aaaaah, that hurts . He clenched his teeth . Where is the Old Bear? " Jon . . . it grieves me to say, but Lord Commander Mormont was murdered at Craster ' s Keep, at the hands of his Sworn Brothers . " " Bro . . . our own men? " Aemon ' s words hurt a hundred times worse than his fingers . Jon remembered the Old Bear as last he ' d seen him, standing before his tent with his raven on his arm croaking for corn . Mormont gone? He had feared it ever since he ' d seen the aftermath of battle on the Fist, yet it was no less a blow . " Who was it? Who turned on him? " " Garth of Oldtown, Ollo Lophand, Dirk . . . thieves, cowards and killers, the lot of them . We should have seen it coming . The Watch is not what it was . Too few honest men to keep the rogues in line . " Donal Noye turned the maester ' s blades in the fire . " A dozen true men made it back . Dolorous Edd, Giant, your friend the Aurochs . We had the tale from them . " Only a dozen? Two hundred men had left Castle Black with Lord Commander Mormont, two hundred of the Watch ' s best . " Does this mean Marsh is Lord Commander, then? " The Old Pomegranate was amiable, and a diligent First Steward, but he was woefully ill-suited to face a wildling host. " For the nonce, until we can hold a choosing, " said Maester Aemon . " Clydas, bring me the flask . " A choosing . With Qhorin Halfhand and Ser Jaremy Rykker both dead and Ben Stark still missing, who was there? Not Bowen Marsh or Ser Wynton Stout, that was certain . Had Thoren Smallwood survived the Fist, or Ser Ottyn Wythers? No, it will be Cotter Pyke or Ser Denys Mallister . Which, though? The commanders at the Shadow Tower and Eastwatch were good men, but very different; Ser Denys courtly and cautious, as chivalrous as he was elderly, Pyke younger, bastard-born, rough-tongued, and bold to a fault . Worse, the two men despised each other . The Old Bear had always kept them far apart, at opposite ends of the Wall . The Mallisters had a bone-deep mistrust of the ironborn, Jon knew. A stab of pain reminded him of his own woes . The maester squeezed his hand . " Clydas is bringing milk of the poppy . " Jon tried to rise [BOS] I don ' t need— [EOS]  " You do, " Aemon said firmly . " This will hurt . " Donal Noye crossed the room and shoved Jon back onto his back . " Be still, or I ' ll tie you down . " Even with only one arm, the smith handled him as if he were a child . Clydas returned with a green flask and a rounded stone cup . Maester Aemon poured it full . " Drink this . " Jon had bitten his lip in his struggles . He could taste blood mingled with the thick, chalky potion . It was all he could do not to retch it back up. Clydas brought a basin of warm water, and Maester Aemon washed the pus and blood from his wound . Gentle as he was, even the lightest touch made Jon want to scream . " The Magnar ' s men are disciplined, and they have bronze armor, " he told them . Talking helped keep his mind off his leg. " The Magnar ' s a lord on Skagos, " Noye said . " There were Skagossons at Eastwatch when I first came to the Wall, I remember hearing them talk of him . " " Jon was using the word in its older sense, I think, " Maester Aemon said, " not as a family name but as a title . It derives from the Old Tongue . " Jon agreed [BOS] It means lord, Styr is the Magnar of some place called Thenn, in the far north of the Frostfangs . He has a hundred of his own men, and a score of raiders who know the Gift almost as well as we do . Mance never found the horn, though, that ' s something . The Horn of Winter, that ' s what he was digging for up along the Milkwater . [EOS]  Maester Aemon paused, washcloth in hand . " The Horn of Winter is an ancient legend . Does the King-beyond-the-Wall truly believe that such a thing exists? " " They all do, " said Jon . " Ygritte said they opened a hundred graves . . . graves of kings and heroes, all over the valley of the Milkwater, but they never . . . " " Who is Ygritte? " Donal Noye asked pointedly. A woman of the free folk . How could he explain Ygritte to them? She ' s warm and smart and funny and she can kiss a man or slit his throat . She ' s with Styr, but she ' s not . . . she ' s young, only a girl, in truth, wild, but she . . . She killed an old man for building a fire . His tongue felt thick and clumsy . The milk of the poppy was clouding his wits . I broke my vows with her . I never meant to, but . . . It was wrong . Wrong to love her, wrong to leave her . . . I wasn ' t strong enough . The Halfhand commanded me, ride with them, watch, I must not balk, I . . . His head felt as if it were packed with wet wool. Maester Aemon sniffed Jon ' s wound again . Then he put the bloody cloth back in the basin and said, " Donal, the hot knife, if you please . I shall need you to hold him still . " I will not scream, Jon told himself when he saw the blade glowing red hot . But he broke that vow as well . Donal Noye held him down, while Clydas helped guide the maester ' s hand . Jon did not move, except to pound his fist against the table, again and again and again . The pain was so huge he felt small and weak and helpless inside it, a child whimpering in the dark . Ygritte, he thought, when the stench of burning flesh was in his nose and his own shriek echoing in her ears . Ygritte, I had to . For half a heartbeat the agony started to ebb . But then the iron touched him once again, and he fainted. When his eyelids fluttered open, he was wrapped in thick wool and floating . He could not seem to move, but that did not matter . For a time he dreamed that Ygritte was with him, tending him with gentle hands . Finally he closed his eyes and slept. The next waking was not so gentle . The room was dark, but under the blankets the pain was back, a throbbing in his leg that turned into a hot knife at the least motion . Jon learned that the hard way when he tried to see if he still had a leg . Gasping, he swallowed a scream and made another fist. " Jon? " A candle appeared, and a well-remembered face was looking down on him, big ears and all . " You shouldn ' t move . " Jon reached up, and the other boy clasped his hand and gave it a squeeze [BOS] Pyp? I thought you ' d gone . . . [EOS]  " . . . with the Old Pomegranate? No, he thinks I ' m too small and green . Grenn ' s here too . " " I ' m here too . " Grenn stepped to the other side of the bed . " I fell asleep . " Jon ' s throat was dry . Water, he gasped . Grenn brought it, and held it to his lips . I saw the Fist, he said, after a long swallow . The blood, and the dead horses . . . Noye said a dozen made it back . . . who? " Dywen did . Giant, Dolorous Edd, Sweet Donnel Hill, Ulmer, Left Hand Lew, Garth Greyfeather . Four or five more . Me . " Grenn looked away . " He killed one of the Others, Jon . I saw it . He stabbed him with that dragonglass knife you made him, and we started calling him Sam the Slayer . He hated that . " Sam the Slayer . Jon could hardly imagine a less likely warrior than Sam Tarly . " What happened to him? " " We left him . " Grenn sounded miserable . " I shook him and screamed at him, even slapped his face . Giant tried to drag him to his feet, but he was too heavy . Remember in training how he ' d curl up on the ground and lie there whimpering? At Craster ' s he wouldn ' t even whimper . Dirk and Ollo were tearing up the walls looking for food, Garth and Garth were fighting, some of the others were raping Craster ' s wives . Dolorous Edd figured Dirk ' s bunch would kill all the loyal men to keep us from telling what they ' d done, and they had us two to one . We left Sam with the Old Bear . He wouldn ' t move, Jon . " You were his brother, he almost said . How could you leave him amongst wildlings and murderers? " He might still be alive, " said Pyp . " He might surprise us all and come riding up tomorrow . " " With Mance Rayder ' s head, aye . " Grenn was trying to sound cheerful, Jon could tell . " Sam the Slayer! " Jon tried to sit again . It was as much a mistake as the first time . He cried out, cursing. " Grenn, go wake Maester Aemon, " said Pyp . " Tell him Jon needs more milk of the poppy . " Yes, Jon thought . " No, " he said . " The Magnar . . . " " We know, " said Pyp . " The sentries on the Wall have been told to keep one eye on the south, and Donal Noye dispatched some men to Weatherback Ridge to watch the kingsroad . Maester Aemon ' s sent birds to Eastwatch and the Shadow Tower too . " Maester Aemon shuffled to the bedside, one hand on Grenn ' s shoulder . " Jon, be gentle with yourself . It is good that you have woken, but you must give yourself time to heal . We drowned the wound with boiling wine, and closed you up with a poultice of nettle, mustard seed and moldy bread, but unless you rest . . . " " I can ' t. " Jon fought through the pain to sit . " Mance will be here soon . . . thousands of men, giants, mammoths . . . has word been sent to Winterfell? To the king? " Sweat dripped off his brow . He closed his eyes a moment. Grenn gave Pyp a strange look . " He doesn ' t know . " " Jon, " said Maester Aemon, " much and more happened while you were away, and little of it good . Balon Greyjoy has crowned himself again and sent his longships against the north . Kings sprout like weeds at every hand and we have sent appeals to all of them, yet none will come . They have more pressing uses for their swords, and we are far off and forgotten . And Winterfell . . . Jon, be strong . . . Winterfell is no more . . . " Jon stared at Aemon ' s white eyes and wrinkled face [BOS] No more? My brothers are at Winterfell . Bran and Rickon . . . [EOS]  The maester touched his brow . " I am so very sorry, Jon . Your brothers died at the command of Theon Greyjoy, after he took Winterfell in his father ' s name . When your father ' s bannermen threatened to retake it, he put the castle to the torch . " " Your brothers were avenged, " Grenn said . " Bolton ' s son killed all the ironmen, and it ' s said he ' s flaying Theon Greyjoy inch by inch for what he did . " " I ' m sorry, Jon . " Pyp squeezed his shoulder . " We are all . " Jon had never liked Theon Greyjoy, but he had been their father ' s ward . Another spasm of pain twisted up his leg, and the next he knew he was flat on his back again . " There ' s some mistake, " he insisted . " At Queenscrown I saw a direwolf, a grey direwolf . . . grey . . . it knew me . " If Bran was dead, could some part of him live on in his wolf, as Orell lived within his eagle? " Drink this . " Grenn held a cup to his lips . Jon drank . His head was full of wolves and eagles, the sound of his brothers ' laughter . The faces above him began to blur and fade . They can ' t be dead . Theon would never do that . And Winterfell . . . grey granite, oak and iron, crows wheeling around the towers, steam rising off the hot pools in the godswood, the stone kings sitting on their thrones . . . how could Winterfell be gone? When the dreams took him, he found himself back home once more, splashing in the hot pools beneath a huge white weirwood that had his father ' s face . Ygritte was with him, laughing at him, shedding her skins till she was naked as her name day, trying to kiss him, but he couldn ' t, not with his father watching . He was the blood of Winterfell, a man of the Night ' s Watch . I will not father a bastard, he told her . I will not . I will not . " You know nothing, Jon Snow, " she whispered, her skin dissolving in the hot water, the flesh beneath sloughing off her bones until only skull and skeleton remained, and the pool bubbled thick and red. They woke to the smoke of Mole ' s Town burning. Atop the King ' s Tower, Jon Snow leaned on the padded crutch that Maester Aemon had given him and watched the grey plume rise . Styr had lost all hope of taking Castle Black unawares when Jon escaped him, yet even so, he need not have warned of his approach so bluntly . You may kill us, he reflected, but no one will be butchered in their beds . That much I did, at least. His leg still hurt like blazes when he put his weight on it . He ' d needed Clydas to help him don his fresh-washed blacks and lace up his boots that morning, and by the time they were done he ' d wanted to drown himself in the milk of the poppy . Instead he had settled for half a cup of dreamwine, a chew of willow bark, and the crutch . The beacon was burning on Weatherback Ridge, and the Night ' s Watch had need of every man. " I can fight, " he insisted when they tried to stop him. " Your leg ' s healed, is it? " Noye snorted . " You won ' t mind me giving it a little kick, then? " " I ' d sooner you didn ' t . It ' s stiff, but I can hobble around well enough, and stand and fight if you have need of me . " " I have need of every man who knows which end of the spear to stab into the wildlings . " " The pointy end . " Jon had told his little sister something like that once, he remembered. Noye rubbed the bristle on his chin . " Might be you ' ll do . We ' ll put you on a tower with a longbow, but if you bloody well fall off don ' t come crying to me . " He could see the kingsroad wending its way south through stony brown fields and over windswept hills . The Magnar would be coming up that road before the day was done, his Thenns marching behind him with axes and spears in their hands and their bronze-and-leather shields on their backs . Grigg the Goat, Quort, Big Boil, and the rest will be coming as well . And Ygritte . The wildlings had never been his friends, he had not allowed them to be his friends, but her . . . He could feel the throb of pain where her arrow had gone through the meat and muscle of his thigh . He remembered the old man ' s eyes too, and the black blood rushing from his throat as the storm cracked overhead . But he remembered the grotto best of all, the look of her naked in the torchlight, the taste of her mouth when it opened under his . Ygritte, stay away . Go south and raid, go hide in one of those roundtowers you liked so well . You ' ll find nothing here but death. Across the yard, one of the bowmen on the roof of the old Flint Barracks had unlaced his breeches and was pissing through a crenel . Mully, he knew from the man ' s greasy orange hair . Men in black cloaks were visible on other roofs and tower tops as well, though nine of every ten happened to be made of straw . " The scarecrow sentinels, " Donal Noye called them . Only we ' re the crows, Jon mused, and most of us were scared enough. Whatever you called them, the straw soldiers had been Maester Aemon ' s notion . They had more breeches and jerkins and tunics in the storerooms than they ' d had men to fill them, so why not stuff some with straw, drape a cloak around their shoulders, and set them to standing watches? Noye had placed them on every tower and in half the windows . Some were even clutching spears, or had crossbows cocked under their arms . The hope was that the Thenns would see them from afar and decide that Castle Black was too well defended to attack. Jon had six scarecrows sharing the roof of the King ' s Tower with him, along with two actual breathing brothers . Deaf Dick Follard sat in a crenel, methodically cleaning and oiling the mechanism of his crossbow to make sure the wheel turned smoothly, while the Oldtown boy wandered restlessly around the parapets, fussing with the clothes on straw men . Maybe he thinks they will fight better if they ' re posed just right . Or maybe this waiting is fraying his nerves the way it ' s fraying mine. The boy claimed to be eighteen, older than Jon, but he was green as summer grass for all that . Satin, they called him, even in the wool and mail and boiled leather of the Night ' s Watch; the name he ' d gotten in the brothel where he ' d been born and raised . He was pretty as a girl with his dark eyes, soft skin, and raven ' s ringlets . Half a year at Castle Black had toughened up his hands, however, and Noye said he was passable with a crossbow . Whether he had the courage to face what was coming, though . . . Jon used the crutch to limp across the tower top . The King ' s Tower was not the castle ' s tallest—the high, slim, crumbling Lance held that honor, though Othell Yarwyck had been heard to say it might topple any day . Nor was the King ' s Tower strongest—the Tower of Guards beside the kingsroad would be a tougher nut to crack . But it was tall enough, strong enough, and well placed beside the Wall, overlooking the gate and the foot of the wooden stair. The first time he had seen Castle Black with his own eyes, Jon had wondered why anyone would be so foolish as to build a castle without walls . How could it be defended? " It can ' t, " his uncle told him . " That is the point . The Night ' s Watch is pledged to take no part in the quarrels of the realm . Yet over the centuries certain Lords Commander, more proud than wise, forgot their vows and near destroyed us all with their ambitions . Lord Commander Runcel Hightower tried to bequeathe the Watch to his bastard son . Lord Commander Rodrik Flint thought to make himself King-beyond-the-Wall . Tristan Mudd, Mad Marq Rankenfell, Robin Hill . . . did you know that six hundred years ago, the commanders at Snowgate and the Nightfort went to war against each other? And when the Lord Commander tried to stop them, they joined forces to murder him? The Stark in Winterfell had to take a hand . . . and both their heads . Which he did easily, because their strongholds were not defensible . The Night ' s Watch had nine hundred and ninety-six Lords Commander before Jeor Mormont, most of them men of courage and honor . . . but we have had cowards and fools as well, our tyrants and our madmen . We survive because the lords and kings of the Seven Kingdoms know that we pose no threat to them, no matter who should lead us . Our only foes are to the north, and to the north we have the Wall . " Only now those foes have gotten past the Wall to come up from the south, Jon reflected, and the lords and kings of the Seven Kingdoms have forgotten us . We are caught between the hammer and the anvil . Without a wall Castle Black could not be held; Donal Noye knew that as well as any . " The castle does them no good, " the armorer told his little garrison . " Kitchens, common hall, stables, even the towers . . . let them take it all . We ' ll empty the armory and move what stores we can to the top of the Wall, and make our stand around the gate . " So Castle Black had a wall of sorts at last, a crescent-shaped barricade ten feet high made of stores; casks of nails and barrels of salt mutton, crates, bales of black broadcloth, stacked logs, sawn timbers, fire-hardened stakes, and sacks and sacks of grain . The crude rampart enclosed the two things most worth defending; the gate to the north, and the foot of the great wooden switchback stair that clawed and climbed its way up the face of the Wall like a drunken thunderbolt, supported by wooden beams as big as tree trunks driven deep into the ice. The last few moles were still making the long climb, Jon saw, urged on by his brothers . Grenn was carrying a little boy in his arms, while Pyp, two flights below, let an old man lean upon his shoulder . The oldest villagers still waited below for the cage to make its way back down to them . He saw a mother pulling along two children, one on either hand, as an older boy ran past her up the steps . Two hundred feet above them, Sky Blue Su and Lady Meliana (who was no lady, all her friends agreed) stood on a landing, looking south . They had a better view of the smoke than he did, no doubt . Jon wondered about the villagers who had chosen not to flee . There were always a few, too stubborn or too stupid or too brave to run, a few who preferred to fight or hide or bend the knee . Maybe the Thenns would spare them. The thing to do would be to take the attack to them, he thought . With fifty rangers well mounted, we could cut them apart on the road . They did not have fifty rangers, though, nor half as many horses . The garrison had not returned, and there was no way to know just where they were, or even whether the riders that Noye had sent out had reached them. We are the garrison, Jon told himself, and look at us . The brothers Bowen Marsh had left behind were old men, cripples, and green boys, just as Donal Noye had warned him . He could see some wrestling barrels up the steps, others on the barricade; stout old Kegs, as slow as ever, Spare Boot hopping along briskly on his carved wooden leg, half-mad Easy who fancied himself Florian the Fool reborn, Dornish Dilly, Red Alyn of the Rosewood, Young Henly (well past fifty), Old Henly (well past seventy), Hairy Hal, Spotted Pate of Maidenpool . A couple of them saw Jon looking down from atop the King ' s Tower and waved up at him . Others turned away . They still think me a turncloak . That was a bitter draft to drink, but Jon could not blame them . He was a bastard, after all . Everyone knew that bastards were wanton and treacherous by nature, having been born of lust and deceit . And he had made as many enemies as friends at Castle Black . . . Rast, for one . Jon had once threatened to have Ghost rip his throat out unless he stopped tormenting Samwell Tarly, and Rast did not forget things like that . He was raking dry leaves into piles under the stairs just now, but every so often he stopped long enough to give Jon a nasty look. " No, " Donal Noye roared at three of the Mole ' s Town men, down below . " The pitch goes to the hoist, the oil up the steps, crossbow bolts to the fourth, fifth, and sixth landings, spears to first and second . Stack the lard under the stair, yes, there, behind the planks . The casks of meat are for the barricade . Now, you poxy plow pushers, NOW! " He has a lord ' s voice, Jon thought . His father had always said that in battle a captain ' s lungs were as important as his sword arm . " It does not matter how brave or brilliant a man is, if his commands cannot be heard, " Lord Eddard told his sons, so Robb and he used to climb the towers of Winterfell to shout at each other across the yard . Donal Noye could have drowned out both of them . The moles all went in terror of him, and rightfully so, since he was always threatening to rip their heads off. Three-quarters of the village had taken Jon ' s warning to heart and come to Castle Black for refuge . Noye had decreed that every man still spry enough to hold a spear or swing an axe would help defend the barricade, else they could damn well go home and take their chances with the Thenns . He had emptied the armory to put good steel in their hands; big double-bladed axes, razor-sharp daggers, longswords, maces, spiked morningstars . Clad in studded leather jerkins and mail hauberks, with greaves for their legs and gorgets to keep their heads on their shoulders, a few of them even looked like soldiers . In a bad light . If you squint. Noye had put the women and children to work as well . Those too young to fight would carry water and tend the fires, the Mole ' s Town midwife would assist Clydas and Maester Aemon with any wounded, and Three-Finger Hobb suddenly had more spit boys, kettle stirrers, and onion choppers than he knew what to do with . Two of the whores had even offered to fight, and had shown enough skill with the crossbow to be given a place on the steps forty feet up. " It ' s cold . " Satin stood with his hands tucked into his armpits under his cloak . His cheeks were bright red. Jon made himself smile [BOS] The Frostfangs are cold . This is a brisk autumn day . [EOS]  " I hope I never see the Frostfangs then . I knew a girl in Oldtown who liked to ice her wine . That ' s the best place for ice, I think . In wine . " Satin glanced south, frowned . " You think the scarecrow sentinels scared them off, my lord? " " We can hope . " It was possible, Jon supposed . . . but more likely the wildlings had simply paused for a bit of rape and plunder in Mole ' s Town . Or maybe Styr was waiting for nightfall, to move up under cover of darkness. Midday came and went, with still no sign of Thenns on the kingsroad . Jon heard footsteps inside the tower, though, and Owen the Oaf popped up out of the trapdoor, red-faced from the climb . He had a basket of buns under one arm, a wheel of cheese under the other, a bag of onions dangling from one hand . " Hobb said to feed you, in case you ' re stuck up here awhile . " That, or for our last meal . " Thank him for us, Owen . " Dick Follard was deaf as a stone, but his nose worked well enough . The buns were still warm from the oven when he went digging in the basket and plucked one out . He found a crock of butter as well, and spread some with his dagger . " Raisins, " he announced happily . " Nuts, too . " His speech was thick, but easy enough to understand once you got used to it. " You can have mine too, " said Satin . " I ' m not hungry . " Jon told him [BOS] Eat, There ' s no knowing when you ' ll have another chance . [EOS] He took two buns himself . The nuts were pine nuts, and besides the raisins there were bits of dried apple. " Will the wildlings come today, Lord Snow? " Owen asked. " You ' ll know if they do, " said Jon . " Listen for the horns . " " Two . Two is for wildlings . " Owen was tall, towheaded, and amiable, a tireless worker and surprisingly deft when it came to working wood and fixing catapults and the like, but as he ' d gladly tell you, his mother had dropped him on his head when he was a baby, and half his wits had leaked out through his ear. Jon asked him [BOS] You remember where to go? [EOS]  " I ' m to go to the stairs, Donal Noye says . I ' m to go up to the third landing and shoot my crossbow down at the wildlings if they try to climb over the barrier . The third landing, one two three . " His head bobbed up and down . " If the wildlings attack, the king will come and help us, won ' t he? He ' s a mighty warrior, King Robert . He ' s sure to come . Maester Aemon sent him a bird . " There was no use telling him that Robert Baratheon was dead . He would forget it, as he ' d forgotten it before . Jon agreed . That seemed to make Owen happy [BOS] Maester Aemon sent him a bird, [EOS]  Maester Aemon had sent a lot of birds . . . not to one king, but to four . Wildlings at the gate, the message ran . The realm in danger . Send all the help you can to Castle Black . Even as far as Oldtown and the Citadel the ravens flew, and to half a hundred mighty lords in their castles . The northern lords offered their best hope, so to them Aemon had sent two birds . To the Umbers and the Boltons, to Castle Cerwyn and Torrhen ' s Square, Karhold and Deepwood Motte, to Bear Island, Oldcastle, Widow ' s Watch, White Harbor, Barrowton, and the Rills, to the mountain fastnesses of the Liddles, the Burleys, the Norreys, the Harclays, and the Wulls, the black birds brought their plea . Wildlings at the gate . The north in danger . Come with all your strength. Well, ravens might have wings, but lords and kings do not . If help was coming, it would not come today. As morning turned to afternoon, the smoke of Mole ' s Town blew away and the southern sky was clear again . No clouds, thought Jon . That was good . Rain or snow could doom them all. Clydas and Maester Aemon rode the winch cage up to safety at the top of the Wall, and most of the Mole ' s Town wives as well . Men in black cloaks paced restlessly on the tower tops and shouted back and forth across the courtyards . Septon Cellador led the men on the barricade in a prayer, beseeching the Warrior to give them strength . Deaf Dick Follard curled up beneath his cloak and went to sleep . Satin walked a hundred leagues in circles, round and round the crenellations . The Wall wept and the sun crept across a hard blue sky . Near evenfall, Owen the Oaf returned with a loaf of black bread and a pail of Hobb ' s best mutton, cooked in a thick broth of ale and onions . Even Dick woke up for that . They ate every bit of it, using chunks of bread to wipe the bottom of the pail . By the time they were done the sun was low in the west, the shadows sharp and black throughout the castle . Jon told Satin, [BOS] Light the fire, and fill the kettle with oil . [EOS]  He went downstairs himself to bar the door, to try and work some of the stiffness from his leg . That was a mistake, and Jon soon knew it, but he clutched the crutch and saw it through all the same . The door to the King ' s Tower was oak studded with iron . It might delay the Thenns, but it would not stop them if they wanted to come in . Jon slammed the bar down in its notches, paid a visit to the privy—it might well be his last chance—and hobbled back up to the roof, grimacing at the pain. The west had gone the color of a blood bruise, but the sky above was cobalt blue, deepening to purple, and the stars were coming out . Jon sat between two merlons with only a scarecrow for company and watched the Stallion gallop up the sky . Or was it the Horned Lord? He wondered where Ghost was now . He wondered about Ygritte as well, and told himself that way lay madness. They came in the night, of course . Like thieves, Jon thought . Like murderers. Satin pissed himself when the horns blew, but Jon pretended not to notice . " Go shake Dick by the shoulder, " he told the Oldtown boy, " else he ' s liable to sleep through the fight . " " I ' m frightened . " Satin ' s face was a ghastly white. So are they . Jon leaned his crutch up against a merlon and took up his longbow, bending the smooth thick Dornish yew to slip a bowstring through the notches . Don ' t waste a quarrel unless you know you have a good clean shot, he said when Satin returned from waking Dick . We have an ample supply up here, but ample doesn ' t mean inexhaustible . And step behind a merlon to reload, don ' t try and hide in back of a scarecrow . They ' re made of straw, an arrow will punch through them . He did not bother telling Dick Follard anything . Dick could read your lips if there was enough light and he gave a damn what you were saying, but he knew it all already. The three of them took up positions on three sides of the round tower . Jon hung a quiver from his belt and pulled an arrow . The shaft was black, the fletching grey . As he notched it to his string, he remembered something that Theon Greyjoy had once said after a hunt . " The boar can keep his tusks and the bear his claws, " he had declared, smiling that way he did . " There ' s nothing half so mortal as a grey goose feather . " Jon had never been half the hunter that Theon was, but he was no stranger to the longbow either . There were dark shapes slipping around the armory, backs against the stone, but he could not see them well enough to waste an arrow . He heard distant shouts, and saw the archers on the Tower of Guards loosing shafts at the ground . That was too far off to concern Jon . But when he glimpsed three shadows detach themselves from the old stables fifty yards away, he stepped up to the crenel, raised his bow, and drew . They were running, so he led them, waiting, waiting . . . The arrow made a soft hiss as it left his string . A moment later there was a grunt, and suddenly only two shadows were loping across the yard . They ran all the faster, but Jon had already pulled a second arrow from his quiver . This time he hurried the shot too much, and missed . The wildlings were gone by the time he nocked again . He searched for another target, and found four, rushing around the empty shell of the Lord Commander ' s Keep . The moonlight glimmered off their spears and axes, and the gruesome devices on their round leathern shields; skulls and bones, serpents, bear claws, twisted demonic faces . Free folk, he knew . The Thenns carried shields of black boiled leather with bronze rims and bosses, but theirs were plain and unadorned . These were the lighter wicker shields of raiders. Jon pulled the goose feather back to his ear, aimed, and loosed the arrow, then nocked and drew and loosed again . The first shaft pierced the bearclaw shield, the second one a throat . The wildling screamed as he went down . He heard the deep thrum of Deaf Dick ' s crossbow to his left, and Satin ' s a moment later . " I got one! " the boy cried hoarsely . " I got one in the chest . " Jon called [BOS] Get another, [EOS]  He did not have to search for targets now; only choose them . He dropped a wildling archer as he was fitting an arrow to his string, then sent a shaft toward the axeman hacking at the door of Hardin ' s Tower . That time he missed, but the arrow quivering in the oak made the wildling reconsider . It was only as he was running off that Jon recognized Big Boil . Half a heartbeat later, old Mully put an arrow through his leg from the roof of the Flint Barracks, and he crawled off bleeding . That will stop him bitching about his boil, Jon thought. When his quiver was empty, he went to get another, and moved to a different crenel, side by side with Deaf Dick Follard . Jon got off three arrows for every bolt Deaf Dick discharged, but that was the advantage of the longbow . The crossbow penetrated better, some insisted, but it was slow and cumbersome to reload . He could hear the wildlings shouting to each other, and somewhere to the west a warhorn blew . The world was moonlight and shadow, and time became an endless round of notch and draw and loose . A wildling arrow ripped through the throat of the straw sentinel beside him, but Jon Snow scarcely noticed . Give me one clean shot at the Magnar of Thenn, he prayed to his father ' s gods . The Magnar at least was a foe that he could hate . Give me Styr. His fingers were growing stiff and his thumb was bleeding, but still Jon notched and drew and loosed . A gout of flame caught his eye, and he turned to see the door of the common hall afire . It was only a few moments before the whole great timbered hall was burning . Three-Finger Hobb and his Mole ' s Town helpers were safe atop the Wall, he knew, but it felt like a punch in the belly all the same . " JON, " Deaf Dick yelled in his thick voice, " the armory . " They were on the roof, he saw . One had a torch . Dick hopped up on the crenel for a better shot, jerked his crossbow to his shoulder, and sent a quarrel thrumming toward the torch man . He missed. The archer down below him didn ' t. Follard never made a sound, only toppled forward headlong over the parapet . It was a hundred feet to the yard below . Jon heard the thump as he was peering round a straw soldier, trying to see where the arrow had come from . Not ten feet from Deaf Dick ' s body, he glimpsed a leather shield, a ragged cloak, a mop of thick red hair . Kissed by fire, he thought, lucky . He brought his bow up, but his fingers would not part, and she was gone as suddenly as she ' d appeared . He swiveled, cursing, and loosed a shaft at the men on the armory roof instead, but he missed them as well. By then the east stables were afire too, black smoke and wisps of burning hay pouring from the stalls . When the roof collapsed, flames rose up roaring, so loud they almost drowned out the warhorns of the Thenns . Fifty of them were pounding up the kingsroad in tight column, their shields held up above their heads . Others were swarming through the vegetable garden, across the flagstone yard, around the old dry well . Three had hacked their way through the doors of Maester Aemon ' s apartments in the timber keep below the rookery, and a desperate fight was going on atop the Silent Tower, longswords against bronze axes . None of that mattered . The dance has moved on, he thought. Jon hobbled across to Satin and grabbed him by the shoulder [BOS] With me, [EOS] he shouted . Together they moved to the north parapet, where the King ' s Tower looked down on the gate and Donal Noye ' s makeshift wall of logs and barrels and sacks of corn . The Thenns were there before them . They wore halfhelms, and had thin bronze disks sewn to their long leather shirts . Many wielded bronze axes, though a few were chipped stone . More had short stabbing spears with leaf-shaped heads that gleamed redly in the light from the burning stables . They were screaming in the Old Tongue as they stormed the barricade, jabbing with their spears, swinging their bronze axes, spilling corn and blood with equal abandon while crossbow quarrels and arrows rained down on them from the archers that Donal Noye had posted on the stair. " What do we do? " Satin shouted. Jon shouted back, a black arrow in his hand [BOS] We kill them, [EOS]  No archer could have asked for an easier shot . The Thenns had their backs to the King ' s Tower as they charged the crescent, clambering over bags and barrels to reach the men in black . Both Jon and Satin chanced to choose the same target . He had just reached the top of the barricade when an arrow sprouted from his neck and a quarrel between his shoulder blades . Half a heartbeat later a longsword took him in the belly and he fell back onto the man behind him . Jon reached down to his quiver and found it empty again . Satin was winding back his crossbow . He left him to it and went for more arrows, but he hadn ' t taken more than three steps before the trap slammed open three feet in front of him . Bloody hell, I never even heard the door break. There was no time to think or plan or shout for help . Jon dropped his bow, reached back over his shoulder, ripped Longclaw from its sheath, and buried the blade in the middle of the first head to pop out of the tower . Bronze was no match for Valyrian steel . The blow sheared right through the Thenn ' s helm and deep into his skull, and he went crashing back down where he ' d come from . There were more behind him, Jon knew from the shouting . He fell back and called to Satin . The next man to make the climb got a quarrel through his cheek . He vanished too . The oil, Jon said . Satin nodded . Together they snatched up the thick quilted pads they ' d left beside the fire, lifted the heavy kettle of boiling oil, and dumped it down the hole on the Thenns below . The shrieks were as bad as anything he had ever heard, and Satin looked as though he was going to be sick . Jon kicked the trapdoor shut, set the heavy iron kettle on top of it, and gave the boy with the pretty face a hard shake . Retch later, Jon yelled . Come. They had only been gone from the parapets for a few moments, but everything below had changed . A dozen black brothers and a few Mole ' s Town men still stood atop the crates and barrels, but the wildlings were swarming over all along the crescent, pushing them back . Jon saw one shove his spear up through Rast ' s belly so hard he lifted him into the air . Young Henly was dead and Old Henly was dying, surrounded by foes . He could see Easy spinning and slashing, laughing like a loon, his cloak flapping as he leapt from cask to cask . A bronze axe caught him just below the knee and the laughter turned into a bubbling shriek. " They ' re breaking, " Satin said. " No, " said Jon, " they ' re broken . " It happened quickly . One mole fled and then another, and suddenly all the villagers were throwing down their weapons and abandoning the barricade . The brothers were too few to hold alone . Jon watched them try and form a line to fall back in order, but the Thenns washed over them with spear and axe, and then they were fleeing too . Dornish Dilly slipped and went down on his face, and a wildling planted a spear between his shoulder blades . Kegs, slow and short of breath, had almost reached the bottom step when a Thenn caught the end of his cloak and yanked him around . . . but a crossbow quarrel dropped the man before his axe could fall . " Got him, " Satin crowed, as Kegs staggered to the stair and began to crawl up the steps on hands and knees. The gate is lost . Donal Noye had closed and chained it, but it was there for the taking, the iron bars glimmering red with reflected firelight, the cold black tunnel behind . No one had fallen back to defend it; the only safety was on top of the Wall, seven hundred feet up the crooked wooden stairs. Jon asked Satin [BOS] What gods do you pray to? [EOS]  " The Seven, " the boy from Oldtown said. Jon told him [BOS] Pray, then, Pray to your new gods, and I ' ll pray to my old ones . [EOS] It all turned here. With the confusion at the trapdoor, Jon had forgotten to fill his quiver . He limped back across the roof and did that now, and picked up his bow as well . The kettle had not moved from where he ' d left it, so it seemed as though they were safe enough for the nonce . The dance has moved on, and we ' re watching from the gallery, he thought as he hobbled back . Satin was loosing quarrels at the wildlings on the steps, then ducking down behind a merlon to cock the crossbow . He may be pretty, but he ' s quick. The real battle was on the steps . Noye had put spearmen on the two lowest landings, but the headlong flight of the villagers had panicked them and they had joined the flight, racing up toward the third landing with the Thenns killing anyone who fell behind . The archers and crossbowmen on the higher landings were trying to drop shafts over their heads . Jon nocked an arrow, drew, and loosed, and was pleased when one of the wildlings went rolling down the steps . The heat of the fires was making the Wall weep, and the flames danced and shimmered against the ice . The steps shook to the footsteps of men running for their lives. Again Jon notched and drew and loosed, but there was only one of him and one of Satin, and a good sixty or seventy Thenns pounding up the stairs, killing as they went, drunk on victory . On the fourth landing, three brothers in black cloaks stood shoulder to shoulder with longswords in their hands, and battle was joined again, briefly . But there were only three and soon enough the wildling tide washed over them, and their blood dripped down the steps . " A man is never so vulnerable in battle as when he flees, " Lord Eddard had told Jon once . " A running man is like a wounded animal to a soldier . It gets his bloodlust up . " The archers on the fifth landing fled before the battle even reached them . It was a rout, a red rout. Jon told Satin . There were four of them stacked beside the fire, their heads wrapped in oily rags . There were a dozen fire arrows too . The Oldtown boy thrust one torch into the fire until it was blazing brightly, and brought the rest back under his arm, unlit . He looked frightened again, as well he might . Jon was frightened too [BOS] Fetch the torches, [EOS]  It was then that he saw Styr . The Magnar was climbing up the barricade, over the gutted corn sacks and smashed barrels and the bodies of friends and foe alike . His bronze scale armor gleamed darkly in the firelight . Styr had taken off his helm to survey the scene of his triumph, and the bald earless whoreson was smiling . In his hand was a long weirwood spear with an ornate bronze head . When he saw the gate, he pointed the spear at it and barked something in the Old Tongue to the half-dozen Thenns around him . Too late, Jon thought . You should have led your men over the barricade, you might have been able to save a few. Up above, a warhorn sounded, long and low . Not from the top of the Wall, but from the ninth landing, some two hundred feet up, where Donal Noye was standing. Jon notched a fire arrow to his bowstring, and Satin lit it from the torch . He stepped to the parapet, drew, aimed, loosed . Ribbons of flame trailed behind as the shaft sped downward and thudded into its target, crackling. Not Styr . The steps . Or more precisely, the casks and kegs and sacks that Donal Noye had piled up beneath the steps, as high as the first landing; the barrels of lard and lamp oil, the bags of leaves and oily rags, the split logs, bark, and wood shavings . Again, said Jon, and, Again, and, Again . Other longbowmen were firing too, from every tower top in range, some sending their arrows up in high arcs to drop before the Wall . When Jon ran out of fire arrows, he and Satin began to light the torches and fling them from the crenels. Up above another fire was blooming . The old wooden steps had drunk up oil like a sponge, and Donal Noye had drenched them from the ninth landing all the way down to the seventh . Jon could only hope that most of their own people had staggered up to safety before Noye threw the torches . The black brothers at least had known the plan, but the villagers had not. Wind and fire did the rest . All Jon had to do was watch . With flames below and flames above, the wildlings had nowhere to go . Some continued upward, and died . Some went downward, and died . Some stayed where they were . They died as well . Many leapt from the steps before they burned, and died from the fall . Twenty-odd Thenns were still huddled together between the fires when the ice cracked from the heat, and the whole lower third of the stair broke off, along with several tons of ice . That was the last that Jon Snow saw of Styr, the Magnar of Thenn . The Wall defends itself, he thought. Jon asked Satin to help him down to the yard . His wounded leg hurt so badly that he could hardly walk, even with the crutch . " Bring the torch, " he told the boy from Oldtown . " I need to look for someone . " It had been mostly Thenns on the steps . Surely some of the free folk had escaped . Mance ' s people, not the Magnar ' s . She might have been one . So they climbed down past the bodies of the men who ' d tried the trapdoor, and Jon wandered through the dark with his crutch under one arm, and the other around the shoulders of a boy who ' d been a whore in Oldtown. The stables and the common hall had burned down to smoking cinders by then, but the fire still raged along the wall, climbing step by step and landing by landing . From time to time they ' d hear a groan and then a craaaack, and another chunk would come crashing off the Wall . The air was full of ash and ice crystals. He found Quort dead, and Stone Thumbs dying . He found some dead and dying Thenns he had never truly known . He found Big Boil, weak from all the blood he ' d lost but still alive. He found Ygritte sprawled across a patch of old snow beneath the Lord Commander ' s Tower, with an arrow between her breasts . The ice crystals had settled over her face, and in the moonlight it looked as though she wore a glittering silver mask. The arrow was black, Jon saw, but it was fletched with white duck feathers . Not mine, he told himself, not one of mine . But he felt as if it were. When he knelt in the snow beside her, her eyes opened . " Jon Snow, " she said, very softly . It sounded as though the arrow had found a lung . " Is this a proper castle now? Not just a tower? " " It is . " Jon took her hand. " Good, " she whispered . " I wanted t ' see one proper castle, before . . . before I . . . " You ' ll see a hundred castles, he promised her . The battle ' s done . Maester Aemon will see to you . He touched her hair . You ' re kissed by fire, remember? Lucky . It will take more than an arrow to kill you . Aemon will draw it out and patch you up, and we ' ll get you some milk of the poppy for the pain. She just smiled at that . " D ' you remember that cave? We should have stayed in that cave . I told you so . " " We ' ll go back to the cave, " he said . " You ' re not going to die, Ygritte . You ' re not . " " Oh . " Ygritte cupped his cheek with her hand . " You know nothing, Jon Snow, " she sighed, dying. He dreamt he was back in Winterfell, limping past the stone kings on their thrones . Their grey granite eyes turned to follow him as he passed, and their grey granite fingers tightened on the hilts of the rusted swords upon their laps . You are no Stark, he could hear them mutter, in heavy granite voices . There is no place for you here . Go away . He walked deeper into the darkness . Father? he called . Bran? Rickon? No one answered . A chill wind was blowing on his neck . Uncle? he called . Uncle Benjen? Father? Please, Father, help me . Up above he heard drums . They are feasting in the Great Hall, but I am not welcome there . I am no Stark, and this is not my place . His crutch slipped and he fell to his knees . The crypts were growing darker . A light has gone out somewhere . Ygritte? he whispered . Forgive me . Please . But it was only a direwolf, grey and ghastly, spotted with blood, his golden eyes shining sadly through the dark . . . The cell was dark, the bed hard beneath him . His own bed, he remembered, his own bed in his steward ' s cell beneath the Old Bear ' s chambers . By rights it should have brought him sweeter dreams . Even beneath the furs, he was cold . Ghost had shared his cell before the ranging, warming it against the chill of night . And in the wild, Ygritte had slept beside him . Both gone now . He had burned Ygritte himself, as he knew she would have wanted, and Ghost . . . Where are you? Was he dead as well, was that what his dream had meant, the bloody wolf in the crypts? But the wolf in the dream had been grey, not white . Grey, like Bran ' s wolf . Had the Thenns hunted him down and killed him after Queenscrown? If so, Bran was lost to him for good and all. Jon was trying to make sense of that when the horn blew. The Horn of Winter, he thought, still confused from sleep . But Mance never found Joramun ' s horn, so that couldn ' t be . A second blast followed, as long and deep as the first . Jon had to get up and go to the Wall, he knew, but it was so hard . . . He shoved aside his furs and sat . The pain in his leg seemed duller, nothing he could not stand . He had slept in his breeches and tunic and smallclothes, for the added warmth, so he had only to pull on his boots and don leather and mail and cloak . The horn blew again, two long blasts, so he slung Longclaw over one shoulder, found his crutch, and hobbled down the steps. It was the black of night outside, bitter cold and overcast . His brothers were spilling out of towers and keeps, buckling their swordbelts and walking toward the Wall . Jon looked for Pyp and Grenn, but could not find them . Perhaps one of them was the sentry blowing the horn . It is Mance, he thought . He has come at last . That was good . We will fight a battle, and then we ' ll rest . Alive or dead, we ' ll rest. Where the stair had been, only an immense tangle of charred wood and broken ice remained below the Wall . The winch raised them up now, but the cage was only big enough for ten men at a time, and it was already on its way up by the time Jon arrived . He would need to wait for its return . Others waited with him; Satin, Mully, Spare Boot, Kegs, big blond Hareth with his buck teeth . Everyone called him Horse . He had been a stablehand in Mole ' s Town, one of the few moles who had stayed at Castle Black . The rest had run back to their fields and hovels, or their beds in the underground brothel . Horse wanted to take the black, though, the great buck-toothed fool . Zei remained as well, the whore who ' d proved so handy with a crossbow, and Noye had kept three orphan boys whose father had died on the steps . They were young—nine and eight and five—but no one else seemed to want them. As they waited for the cage to come back, Clydas brought them cups of hot mulled wine, while Three-Finger Hobb passed out chunks of black bread . Jon took a heel from him and gnawed on it. " Is it Mance Rayder? " Satin asked anxiously. " We can hope so . " There were worse things than wildlings in the dark . Jon remembered the words the wildling king had spoken on the Fist of the First Men, as they stood amidst that pink snow . When the dead walk, walls and stakes and swords mean nothing . You cannot fight the dead, Jon Snow . No man knows that half so well as me . Just thinking of it made the wind seem a little colder. Finally the cage came clanking back down, swaying at the end of the long chain, and they crowded in silently and shut the door. Mully yanked the bell rope three times . A moment later they began to rise, by fits and starts at first, then more smoothly . No one spoke . At the top the cage swung sideways and they clambered out one by one . Horse gave Jon a hand down onto the ice . The cold hit him in the teeth like a fist. A line of fires burned along the top of the Wall, contained in iron baskets on poles taller than a man . The cold knife of the wind stirred and swirled the flames, so the lurid orange light was always shifting . Bundles of quarrels, arrows, spears, and scorpion bolts stood ready on every hand . Rocks were piled ten feet high, big wooden barrels of pitch and lamp oil lined up beside them . Bowen Marsh had left Castle Black well supplied in everything save men . The wind was whipping at the black cloaks of the scarecrow sentinels who stood along the ramparts, spears in hand . Jon said to Donal Noye when he limped up beside him [BOS] I hope it wasn ' t one of them who blew the horn, [EOS]  " Did you hear that? " Noye asked. There was the wind, and horses, and something else . Jon said [BOS] A mammoth, That was a mammoth . [EOS]  The armorer ' s breath was frosting as it blew from his broad, flat nose . North of the Wall was a sea of darkness that seemed to stretch forever . Jon could make out the faint red glimmer of distant fires moving through the wood . It was Mance, certain as sunrise . The Others did not light torches. " How do we fight them if we can ' t see them? " Horse asked. Donal Noye turned toward the two great trebuchets that Bowen Marsh had restored to working order . " Give me light! " he roared. Barrels of pitch were loaded hastily into the slings and set afire with a torch . The wind fanned the flames to a brisk red fury . " NOW! " Noye bellowed . The counterweights plunged downward, the throwing arms rose to thud against the padded crossbars . The burning pitch went tumbling through the darkness, casting an eerie flickering light upon the ground below . Jon caught a glimpse of mammoths moving ponderously through the half-light, and just as quickly lost them again . A dozen, maybe more . The barrels struck the earth and burst . They heard a deep bass trumpeting, and a giant roared something in the Old Tongue, his voice an ancient thunder that sent shivers up Jon ' s spine. " Again! " Noye shouted, and the trebuchets were loaded once more . Two more barrels of burning pitch went crackling through the gloom to come crashing down amongst the foe . This time one of them struck a dead tree, enveloping it in flame . Not a dozen mammoths, Jon saw, a hundred. He stepped to the edge of the precipice . Careful, he reminded himself, it is a long way down . Red Alyn sounded his sentry ' s horn once more, Aaaaahoooooooooooooooooooooooooo, aaaaahoooooooooooooooooooo . And now the wildlings answered, not with one horn but with a dozen, and with drums and pipes as well . We are come, they seemed to say, we are come to break your Wall, to take your lands and steal your daughters . The wind howled, the trebuchets creaked and thumped, the barrels flew . Behind the giants and the mammoths, Jon saw men advancing on the Wall with bows and axes . Were there twenty or twenty thousand? In the dark there was no way to tell . This is a battle of blind men, but Mance has a few thousand more of them than we do. " The gate! " Pyp cried out . " They ' re at the GATE! " The Wall was too big to be stormed by any conventional means; too high for ladders or siege towers, too thick for battering rams . No catapult could throw a stone large enough to breach it, and if you tried to set it on fire, the icemelt would quench the flames . You could climb over, as the raiders did near Greyguard, but only if you were strong and fit and sure-handed, and even then you might end up like Jarl, impaled on a tree . They must take the gate, or they cannot pass. But the gate was a crooked tunnel through the ice, smaller than any castle gate in the Seven Kingdoms, so narrow that rangers must lead their garrons through single file . Three iron grates closed the inner passage, each locked and chained and protected by a murder hole . The outer door was old oak, nine inches thick and studded with iron, not easy to break through . But Mance has mammoths, he reminded himself, and giants as well. " Must be cold down there, " said Noye . " What say we warm them up, lads? " A dozen jars of lamp oil had been lined up on the precipice . Pyp ran down the line with a torch, setting them alight . Owen the Oaf followed, shoving them over the edge one by one . Tongues of pale yellow fire swirled around the jars as they plunged downward . When the last was gone, Grenn kicked loose the chocks on a barrel of pitch and sent it rumbling and rolling over the edge as well . The sounds below changed to shouts and screams, sweet music to their ears. Yet still the drums beat on, the trebuchets shuddered and thumped, and the sound of skinpipes came wafting through the night like the songs of strange fierce birds . Septon Cellador began to sing as well, his voice tremulous and thick with wine. Gentle Mother, font of mercy, save our sons from war, we pray, stay the swords and stay the arrows, let them know . . . Donal Noye rounded on him . " Any man here stays his sword, I ' ll chuck his puckered arse right off this Wall . . . starting with you, Septon . Archers! Do we have any bloody archers? " " Here, " said Satin. " And here, " said Mully . " But how can I find a target? It ' s black as the inside of a pig ' s belly . Where are they? " Noye pointed north . Loose enough arrows, might be you ' ll find a few . At least you ' ll make them fretful . He looked around the ring of firelit faces . I need two bows and two spears to help me hold the tunnel if they break the gate . More than ten stepped forward, and the smith picked his four . Jon, you have the Wall till I return. For a moment Jon thought he had misheard . It had sounded as if Noye were leaving him in command . " My lord? " " Lord? I ' m a blacksmith . I said, the Wall is yours . " There are older men, Jon wanted to say, better men . I am still as green as summer grass . I ' m wounded, and I stand accused of desertion . His mouth had gone bone dry . " Aye, " he managed. Afterward it would seem to Jon Snow as if he ' d dreamt that night . Side by side with the straw soldiers, with longbows or crossbows clutched in half-frozen hands, his archers launched a hundred flights of arrows against men they never saw . From time to time a wildling arrow came flying back in answer . He sent men to the smaller catapults and filled the air with jagged rocks the size of a giant ' s fist, but the darkness swallowed them as a man might swallow a handful of nuts . Mammoths trumpeted in the gloom, strange voices called out in stranger tongues, and Septon Cellador prayed so loudly and drunkenly for the dawn to come that Jon was tempted to chuck him over the edge himself . They heard a mammoth dying at their feet and saw another lurch burning through the woods, trampling down men and trees alike . The wind blew cold and colder . Hobb rode up the chain with cups of onion broth, and Owen and Clydas served them to the archers where they stood, so they could gulp them down between arrows . Zei took a place among them with her crossbow . Hours of repeated jars and shocks knocked something loose on the right-hand trebuchet, and its counterweight came crashing free, suddenly and catastrophically, wrenching the throwing arm sideways with a splintering crash . The left-hand trebuchet kept throwing, but the wildlings had quickly learned to shun the place where its loads were landing. We should have twenty trebuchets, not two, and they should be mounted on sledges and turntables so we could move them . It was a futile thought . He might as well wish for another thousand men, and maybe a dragon or three. Donal Noye did not return, nor any of them who ' d gone down with him to hold that black cold tunnel . The Wall is mine, Jon reminded himself whenever he felt his strength flagging . He had taken up a longbow himself, and his fingers felt crabbed and stiff, half-frozen . His fever was back as well, and his leg would tremble uncontrollably, sending a white-hot knife of pain right through him . One more arrow, and I ' ll rest, he told himself, half a hundred times . Just one more . Whenever his quiver was empty, one of the orphaned moles would bring him another . One more quiver, and I ' m done . It couldn ' t be long until the dawn. When morning came, none of them quite realized it at first . The world was still dark, but the black had turned to grey and shapes were beginning to emerge half-seen from the gloom . Jon lowered his bow to stare at the mass of heavy clouds that covered the eastern sky . He could see a glow behind them, but perhaps he was only dreaming . He notched another arrow. Then the rising sun broke through to send pale lances of light across the battleground . Jon found himself holding his breath as he looked out over the half-mile swath of cleared land that lay between the Wall and the edge of the forest . In half a night they had turned it into a wasteland of blackened grass, bubbling pitch, shattered stone, and corpses . The carcass of the burned mammoth was already drawing crows . There were giants dead on the ground as well, but behind them . . . Someone moaned to his left, and he heard Septon Cellador say, " Mother have mercy, oh . Oh, oh, oh, Mother have mercy . " Beneath the trees were all the wildlings in the world; raiders and giants, wargs and skinchangers, mountain men, salt sea sailors, ice river cannibals, cave dwellers with dyed faces, dog chariots from the Frozen Shore, Hornfoot men with their soles like boiled leather, all the queer wild folk Mance had gathered to break the Wall . This is not your land, Jon wanted to shout at them . There is no place for you here . Go away . He could hear Tormund Giantsbane laughing at that . " You know nothing, Jon Snow, " Ygritte would have said . He flexed his sword hand, opening and closing the fingers, though he knew full well that swords would not come into it up here. He was chilled and feverish, and suddenly the weight of the longbow was too much . The battle with the Magnar had been nothing, he realized, and the night fight less than nothing, only a probe, a dagger in the dark to try and catch them unprepared . The real battle was only now beginning. " I never knew there would be so many, " Satin said. Jon had . He had seen them before, but not like this, not drawn up in battle array . On the march the wildling column had sprawled over long leagues like some enormous worm, but you never saw all of it at once . But now . . . " Here they come, " someone said in a hoarse voice. Mammoths centered the wildling line, he saw, a hundred or more with giants on their backs clutching mauls and huge stone axes . More giants loped beside them, pushing along a tree trunk on great wooden wheels, its end sharpened to a point . A ram, he thought bleakly . If the gate still stood below, a few kisses from that thing would soon turn it into splinters . On either side of the giants came a wave of horsemen in boiled leather harness with fire-hardened lances, a mass of running archers, hundreds of foot with spears, slings, clubs, and leathern shields . The bone chariots from the Frozen Shore clattered forward on the flanks, bouncing over rocks and roots behind teams of huge white dogs . The fury of the wild, Jon thought as he listened to the skirl of skins, to the dogs barking and baying, the mammoths trumpeting, the free folk whistling and screaming, the giants roaring in the Old Tongue . Their drums echoed off the ice like rolling thunder. He could feel the despair all around him . " There must be a hundred thousand, " Satin wailed . " How can we stop so many? " The Wall will stop them, Jon heard himself say . He turned and said it again, louder . The Wall will stop them . The Wall defends itself . Hollow words, but he needed to say them, almost as much as his brothers needed to hear them . Mance wants to unman us with his numbers . Does he think we ' re stupid? He was shouting now, his leg forgotten, and every man was listening . The chariots, the horsemen, all those fools on foot . . . what are they going to do to us up here? Any of you ever see a mammoth climb a wall? He laughed, and Pyp and Owen and half a dozen more laughed with him . They ' re nothing, they ' re less use than our straw brothers here, they can ' t reach us, they can ' t hurt us, and they don ' t frighten us, do they? " NO! " Grenn shouted. They ' re down there and we ' re up here, Jon said, and so long as we hold the gate they cannot pass . They cannot pass! They were all shouting then, roaring his own words back at him, waving swords and longbows in the air as their cheeks flushed red . Jon saw Kegs standing there with a warhorn slung beneath his arm . Brother, he told him, sound for battle. Grinning, Kegs lifted the horn to his lips, and blew the two long blasts that meant wildlings . Other horns took up the call until the Wall itself seemed to shudder, and the echo of those great deep-throated moans drowned all other sound. Jon said when the horns had died away, [BOS] Archers, you ' ll aim for the giants with that ram, every bloody one of you . Loose at my command, not before . THE GIANTS AND THE RAM . I want arrows raining on them with every step, but we ' ll wait till they ' re in range . Any man who wastes an arrow will need to climb down and fetch it back, do you hear me? [EOS]  " I do, " shouted Owen the Oaf . " I hear you, Lord Snow . " Jon laughed, laughed like a drunk or a madman, and his men laughed with him . The chariots and the racing horsemen on the flanks were well ahead of the center now, he saw . The wildlings had not crossed a third of the half mile, yet their battle line was dissolving . Load the trebuchet with caltrops, Jon said . Owen, Kegs, angle the catapults toward the center . Scorpions, load with fire spears and loose at my command . He pointed at the Mole ' s Town boys . You, you, and you, stand by with torches. The wildling archers shot as they advanced; they would dash forward, stop, loose, then run another ten yards . There were so many that the air was constantly full of arrows, all falling woefully short . A waste, Jon thought . Their want of discipline is showing . The smaller horn-and-wood bows of the free folk were outranged by the great yew longbows of the Night ' s Watch, and the wildlings were trying to shoot at men seven hundred feet above them . Let them shoot, Jon said . Wait . Hold . Their cloaks were flapping behind them . The wind is in our faces, it will cost us range . Wait . Closer, closer . The skins wailed, the drums thundered, the wildling arrows fluttered and fell. Jon lifted his own bow and pulled the arrow to his ear . Satin did the same, and Grenn, Owen the Oaf, Spare Boot, Black Jack Bulwer, Arron and Emrick . Zei hoisted her crossbow to her shoulder . Jon was watching the ram come on and on, the mammoths and giants lumbering forward on either side . They were so small he could have crushed them all in one hand, it seemed . If only my hand was big enough . Through the killing ground they came . A hundred crows rose from the carcass of the dead mammoth as the wildlings thundered past to either side of them . Closer and closer, until . . [BOS] DRAW . [EOS]  The black arrows hissed downward, like snakes on feathered wings . Jon did not wait to see where they struck . He reached for a second arrow as soon as the first left his bow . NOTCH . DRAW . LOOSE . As soon as the arrow flew he found another . NOTCH . DRAW . LOOSE . Again, and then again . Jon shouted for the trebuchet, and heard the creak and heavy thud as a hundred spiked steel caltrops went spinning through the air . Catapults, he called, scorpions . Bowmen, loose at will . Wildling arrows were striking the Wall now, a hundred feet below them . A second giant spun and staggered . Notch, draw, loose . A mammoth veered into another beside it, spilling giants on the ground . Notch, draw, loose . The ram was down and done, he saw, the giants who ' d pushed it dead or dying . Fire arrows, he shouted . I want that ram burning . The screams of wounded mammoths and the booming cries of giants mingled with the drums and pipes to make an awful music, yet still his archers drew and loosed, as if they ' d all gone as deaf as dead Dick Follard . They might be the dregs of the order, but they were men of the Night ' s Watch, or near enough as made no matter . That ' s why they shall not pass. One of the mammoths was running berserk, smashing wildlings with his trunk and crushing archers underfoot . Jon pulled back his bow once more, and launched another arrow at the beast ' s shaggy back to urge him on . To east and west, the flanks of the wildling host had reached the Wall unopposed . The chariots drew in or turned while the horsemen milled aimlessly beneath the looming cliff of ice . " At the gate! " a shout came . Spare Boot, maybe . " Mammoth at the gate! " Jon barked [BOS] Fire, Grenn, Pyp . [EOS]  Grenn thrust his bow aside, wrestled a barrel of oil onto its side, and rolled it to the edge of the Wall, where Pyp hammered out the plug that sealed it, stuffed in a twist of cloth, and set it alight with a torch . They shoved it over together . A hundred feet below it struck the Wall and burst, filling the air with shattered staves and burning oil . Grenn was rolling a second barrel to the precipice by then, and Kegs had one as well . Pyp lit them both . " Got him! " Satin shouted, his head sticking out so far that Jon was certain he was about to fall . " Got him, got him, GOT him! " He could hear the roar of fire . A flaming giant lurched into view, stumbling and rolling on the ground. Then suddenly the mammoths were fleeing, running from the smoke and flames and smashing into those behind them in their terror . Those went backward too, the giants and wildlings behind them scrambling to get out of their way . In half a heartbeat the whole center was collapsing . The horsemen on the flanks saw themselves being abandoned and decided to fall back as well, not one so much as blooded . Even the chariots rumbled off, having done nothing but look fearsome and make a lot of noise . When they break, they break hard, Jon Snow thought as he watched them reel away . The drums had all gone silent . How do you like that music, Mance? How do you like the taste of the Dornishman ' s wife? " Do we have anyone hurt? " he asked. " The bloody buggers got my leg . " Spare Boot plucked the arrow out and waved it above his head . " The wooden one! " A ragged cheer went up . Zei grabbed Owen by the hands, spun him around in a circle, and gave him a long wet kiss right there for all to see . She tried to kiss Jon too, but he held her by the shoulder and pushed her gently but firmly away . " No, " he said . I am done with kissing . Suddenly he was too weary to stand, and his leg was agony from knee to groin . He fumbled for his crutch . " Pyp, help me to the cage . Grenn, you have the Wall . " Me? said Grenn . Him? said Pyp . It was hard to tell which of them was more horrified . But, Grenn stammered, b-but what do I do if the wildlings attack again? Jon told him [BOS] Stop them, [EOS]  As they rode down in the cage, Pyp took off his helm and wiped his brow . Frozen sweat . Is there anything as disgusting as frozen sweat? He laughed . Gods, I don ' t think I have ever been so hungry . I could eat an aurochs whole, I swear it . Do you think Hobb will cook up Grenn for us? When he saw Jon ' s face, his smile died . What ' s wrong? Is it your leg? Jon agreed . Even the words were an effort [BOS] My leg, [EOS]  " Not the battle, though? We won the battle . " Jon said grimly . I want a fire, a hot meal, a warm bed, and something to make my leg stop hurting, he told himself . But first he had to check the tunnel and find what had become of Donal Noye [BOS] Ask me when I ' ve seen the gate, [EOS]  After the battle with the Thenns it had taken them almost a day to clear the ice and broken beams away from the inner gate . Spotted Pate and Kegs and some of the other builders had argued heatedly that they ought just leave the debris there, another obstacle for Mance . That would have meant abandoning the defense of the tunnel, though, and Noye was having none of it . With men in the murder holes and archers and spears behind each inner grate, a few determined brothers could hold off a hundred times as many wildlings and clog the way with corpses . He did not mean to give Mance Rayder free passage through the ice . So with pick and spade and ropes, they had moved the broken steps aside and dug back down to the gate. Jon waited by the cold iron bars while Pyp went to Maester Aemon for the spare key . Surprisingly, the maester himself returned with him, and Clydas with a lantern . " Come see me when we are done, " the old man told Jon while Pyp was fumbling with the chains . " I need to change your dressing and apply a fresh poultice, and you will want some more dreamwine for the pain . " Jon nodded weakly . The door swung open . Pyp led them in, followed by Clydas and the lantern . It was all Jon could do to keep up with Maester Aemon . The ice pressed close around them, and he could feel the cold seeping into his bones, the weight of the Wall above his head . It felt like walking down the gullet of an ice dragon . The tunnel took a twist, and then another . Pyp unlocked a second iron gate . They walked farther, turned again, and saw light ahead, faint and pale through the ice . That ' s bad, Jon knew at once . That ' s very bad. Then Pyp said, " There ' s blood on the floor . " The last twenty feet of the tunnel was where they ' d fought and died . The outer door of studded oak had been hacked and broken and finally torn off its hinges, and one of the giants had crawled in through the splinters . The lantern bathed the grisly scene in a sullen reddish light . Pyp turned aside to retch, and Jon found himself envying Maester Aemon his blindness. Noye and his men had been waiting within, behind a gate of heavy iron bars like the two Pyp had just unlocked . The two crossbows had gotten off a dozen quarrels as the giant struggled toward them . Then the spearmen must have come to the fore, stabbing through the bars . Still the giant found the strength to reach through, twist the head off Spotted Pate, seize the iron gate, and wrench the bars apart . Links of broken chain lay strewn across the floor . One giant . All this was the work of one giant. " Are they all dead? " Maester Aemon asked softly. Yes . Donal was the last . Noye ' s sword was sunk deep in the giant ' s throat, halfway to the hilt . The armorer had always seemed such a big man to Jon, but locked in the giant ' s massive arms he looked almost like a child . The giant crushed his spine . I don ' t know who died first . He took the lantern and moved forward for a better look . Mag . I am the last of the giants . He could feel the sadness there, but he had no time for sadness . It was Mag the Mighty . The king of the giants. He needed sun then . It was too cold and dark inside the tunnel, and the stench of blood and death was suffocating . Jon gave the lantern back to Clydas, squeezed around the bodies and through the twisted bars, and walked toward the daylight to see what lay beyond the splintered door. The huge carcass of a dead mammoth partially blocked the way . One of the beast ' s tusks snagged his cloak and tore it as he edged past . Three more giants lay outside, half buried beneath stone and slush and hardened pitch . He could see where the fire had melted the Wall, where great sheets of ice had come sloughing off in the heat to shatter on the blackened ground . He looked up at where they ' d come from . When you stand here it seems immense, as if it were about to crush you. Jon went back inside to where the others waited [BOS] We need to repair the outer gate as best we can and then block up this section of the tunnel . Rubble, chunks of ice, anything . All the way to the second gate, if we can . Ser Wynton will need to take command, he ' s the last knight left, but he needs to move now, the giants will be back before we know it . We have to tell him— [EOS]  " Tell him what you will, " said Maester Aemon, gently . " He will smile, nod, and forget . Thirty years ago Ser Wynton Stout came within a dozen votes of being Lord Commander . He would have made a fine one . Ten years ago he would still have been capable . No longer . You know that as well as Donal did, Jon . " It was true . Jon told the maester [BOS] You give the order, then, You have been on the Wall your whole life, the men will follow you . We have to close the gate . [EOS]  " I am a maester chained and sworn . My order serves, Jon . We give counsel, not commands . " " Someone must— " " You . You must lead . " " Yes, Jon . It need not be for long . Only until such time as the garrison returns . Donal chose you, and Qhorin Halfhand before him . Lord Commander Mormont made you his steward . You are a son of Winterfell, a nephew of Benjen Stark . It must be you or no one . The Wall is yours, Jon Snow . " Day and night the axes rang. Jon could not remember the last time he had slept . When he closed his eyes he dreamed of fighting; when he woke he fought . Even in the King ' s Tower he could hear the ceaseless thunk of bronze and flint and stolen steel biting into wood, and it was louder when he tried to rest in the warming shed atop the Wall . Mance had sledgehammers at work as well, and long saws with teeth of bone and flint . Once, as he was drifting off into an exhausted sleep, there came a great cracking from the haunted forest, and a sentinel tree came crashing down in a cloud of dirt and needles. He was awake when Owen came to him, lying restless under a pile of furs on the floor of the warming shed . " Lord Snow, " said Owen, shaking his shoulder, " the dawn . " He gave Jon a hand to help pull him back onto his feet . Others were waking as well, jostling one another as they pulled on their boots and buckled their swordbelts in the close confines of the shed . No one spoke . They were all too tired for talk . Few of them ever left the Wall these days . It took too long to ride up and down in the cage . Castle Black had been abandoned to Maester Aemon, Ser Wynton Stout, and a few others too old or ill to fight. " I had a dream that the king had come, " Owen said happily . " Maester Aemon sent a raven, and King Robert came with all his strength . I dreamed I saw his golden banners . " Jon made himself smile [BOS] That would be a welcome sight to see, Owen . [EOS] Ignoring the twinge of pain in his leg, he swept a black fur cloak about his shoulders, gathered up his crutch, and went out onto the Wall to face another day. A gust of wind sent icy tendrils wending through his long brown hair . Half a mile north, the wildling encampments were stirring, their campfires sending up smoky fingers to scratch against the pale dawn sky . Along the edge of the forest they had raised their tents of hide and fur, even a crude longhall of logs and woven branches; there were horselines to the east, mammoths to the west, and men everywhere, sharpening their swords, putting points on crude spears, donning makeshift armor of hide and horn and bone . For every man that he could see, Jon knew there were a score unseen in the wood . The brush gave them some shelter from the elements and hid them from the eyes of the hated crows. Already their archers were stealing forward, pushing their rolling mantlets . " Here come our breakfast arrows, " Pyp announced cheerfully, as he did every morning . It ' s good that he can make a jape of it, Jon thought . Someone has to . Three days ago, one of those breakfast arrows had caught Red Alyn of the Rosewood in the leg . You could still see his body at the foot of the Wall, if you cared to lean out far enough . Jon had to think that it was better for them to smile at Pyp ' s jest than to brood over Alyn ' s corpse. The mantlets were slanting wooden shields, wide enough for five of the free folk to hide behind . The archers pushed them close, then knelt behind them to loose their arrows through slits in the wood . The first time the wildlings rolled them out, Jon had called for fire arrows and set a half-dozen ablaze, but after that Mance started covering them with raw hides . All the fire arrows in the world couldn ' t make them catch now . The brothers had even started wagering as to which of the straw sentinels would collect the most arrows before they were done . Dolorous Edd was leading with four, but Othell Yarwyck, Tumberjon, and Watt of Long Lake had three apiece . It was Pyp who ' d started naming the scarecrows after their missing brothers, too . " It makes it seem as if there ' s more of us, " he said. " More of us with arrows in our bellies, " Grenn complained, but the custom did seem to give his brothers heart, so Jon let the names stand and the wagering continue. On the edge of the Wall an ornate brass Myrish eye stood on three spindly legs . Maester Aemon had once used it to peer at the stars, before his own eyes had failed him . Jon swung the tube down to have a look at the foe . Even at this distance there was no mistaking Mance Rayder ' s huge white tent, sewn together from the pelts of snow bears . The Myrish lenses brought the wildlings close enough for him to make out faces . Of Mance himself he saw no sign this morning, but his woman Dalla was outside tending the fire, while her sister Val milked a she-goat beside the tent . Dalla looked so big it was a wonder she could move . The child must be coming very soon, Jon thought . He swiveled the eye east and searched amongst the tents and trees till he found the turtle . That will be coming very soon as well . The wildlings had skinned one of the dead mammoths during the night, and they were lashing the raw bloody hide over the turtle ' s roof, one more layer on top of the sheepskins and pelts . The turtle had a rounded top and eight huge wheels, and under the hides was a stout wooden frame . When the wildlings had begun knocking it together, Satin thought they were building a ship . Not far wrong . The turtle was a hull turned upside down and opened fore and aft; a longhall on wheels. " It ' s done, isn ' t it? " asked Grenn. Jon shoved away the eye [BOS] Near enough . It will come today, most like . Did you fill the barrels? [EOS]  " Every one . They froze hard during the night, Pyp checked . " Grenn had changed a great deal from the big, clumsy, red-necked boy Jon had first befriended . He had grown half a foot, his chest and shoulders had thickened, and he had not cut his hair nor trimmed his beard since the Fist of the First Men . It made him look as huge and shaggy as an aurochs, the mocking name that Ser Alliser Thorne had hung on him during training . He looked weary now, though . When Jon said as much, he nodded . " I heard their axes all night . Couldn ' t sleep for all the chopping . " " Then go sleep now . " " I don ' t need— " " You do . I want you rested . Go on, I ' m not going to let you sleep through the fight . " He made himself smile . " You ' re the only one who can move those bloody barrels . " Grenn went off muttering, and Jon returned to the far eye, searching the wildling camp . From time to time an arrow would sail past overhead, but he had learned to ignore those . The range was long and the angle was bad, the chances of being hit were small . He still saw no sign of Mance Rayder in the camp, but he spied Tormund Giantsbane and two of his sons around the turtle . The sons were struggling with the mammoth hide while Tormund gnawed on the roast leg of a goat and bellowed orders . Elsewhere he found the wildling skinchanger, Varamyr Sixskins, walking through the trees with his shadowcat dogging his heels. When he heard the rattle of the winch chains and the iron groan of the cage door opening, he knew it would be Hobb bringing their breakfast as he did every morning . The sight of Mance ' s turtle had robbed Jon of his appetite . Their oil was all but gone, and the last barrel of pitch had been rolled off the Wall two nights ago . They would soon run short of arrows as well, and there were no fletchers making more . And the night before last, a raven had come from the west, from Ser Denys Mallister . Bowen Marsh had chased the wildlings all the way to the Shadow Tower, it seemed, and then farther, down into the gloom of the Gorge . At the Bridge of Skulls he had met the Weeper and three hundred wildlings and won a bloody battle . But the victory had been a costly one . More than a hundred brothers slain, among them Ser Endrew Tarth and Ser Aladale Wynch . The Old Pomegranate himself had been carried back to the Shadow Tower sorely wounded . Maester Mullin was tending him, but it would be some time before he was fit to return to Castle Black. When he had read that, Jon had dispatched Zei to Mole ' s Town on their best horse to plead with the villagers to help man the Wall . She never returned . When he sent Mully after her, he came back to report the whole village deserted, even the brothel . Most likely Zei had followed them, straight down the kingsroad . Maybe we should all do the same, Jon reflected glumly. He made himself eat, hungry or no . Bad enough he could not sleep, he could not go on without food as well . Besides, this might be my last meal . It might be the last meal for all of us . So it was that Jon had a belly full of bread, bacon, onions, and cheese when he heard Horse shout, " IT ' S COMING! " No one needed to ask what it was . Nor did Jon need the maester ' s Myrish eye to see it creeping out from amongst the tents and trees . It doesn ' t really look much like a turtle, Satin commented . Turtles don ' t have fur. " Most of them don ' t have wheels either, " said Pyp. Jon commanded, and Kegs blew two long blasts, to wake Grenn and the other sleepers who ' d had the watch during the night . If the wildlings were coming, the Wall would need every man . Gods know, we have few enough . Jon looked at Pyp and Kegs and Satin, Horse and Owen the Oaf, Tim Tangletongue, Mully, Spare Boot, and the rest, and tried to imagine them going belly to belly and blade to blade against a hundred screaming wildlings in the freezing darkness of that tunnel, with only a few iron bars between them . That was what it would come down to, unless they could stop the turtle before the gate was breached [BOS] Sound the warhorn, [EOS]  " It ' s big, " Horse said. Pyp smacked his lips . " Think of all the soup it will make . " The jape was stillborn . Even Pyp sounded tired . He looks half dead, thought Jon, but so do we all . The King-beyond-the-Wall had so many men that he could throw fresh attackers at them every time, but the same handful of black brothers had to meet every assault, and it had worn them ragged. The men beneath the wood and hides would be pulling hard, Jon knew, putting their shoulders into it, straining to keep the wheels turning, but once the turtle was flush against the gate they would exchange their ropes for axes . At least Mance was not sending his mammoths today . Jon was glad of that . Their awesome strength was wasted on the Wall, and their size only made them easy targets . The last had been a day and a half in the dying, its mournful trumpetings terrible to hear. The turtle crept slowly through stones and stumps and brush . The earlier attacks had cost the free folk a hundred lives or more . Most still lay where they had fallen . In the lulls the crows would come and pay them court, but now the birds fled screeching . They liked the look of that turtle no more than he did. Satin, Horse, and the others were looking to him, Jon knew, waiting for his orders . He was so tired, he hardly knew any more . The Wall is mine, he reminded himself . " Owen, Horse, to the catapults . Kegs, you and Spare Boot on the scorpions . The rest of you string your bows . Fire arrows . Let ' s see if we can burn it . " It was likely to be a futile gesture, Jon knew, but it had to be better than standing helpless. Cumbersome and slow-moving, the turtle made for an easy shot, and his archers and crossbowmen soon turned it into a lumbering wooden hedgehog . . . but the wet hides protected it, just as they had the mantlets, and the flaming arrows guttered out almost as soon as they struck . Jon cursed under his breath . " Scorpions, " he commanded . " Catapults . " The scorpions bolts punched deep into the pelts, but did no more damage than the fire arrows . The rocks went bouncing off the turtle ' s roof, leaving dimples in the thick layers of hides . A stone from one of the trebuchets might have crushed it, but the one machine was still broken, and the wildlings had gone wide around the area where the other dropped its loads. " Jon, it ' s still coming, " said Owen the Oaf. He could see that for himself . Inch by inch, yard by yard, the turtle crept closer, rolling, rumbling and rocking as it crossed the killing ground . Once the wildlings got it flush against the Wall, it would give them all the shelter they needed while their axes crashed through the hastily-repaired outer gates . Inside, under the ice, they would clear the loose rubble from the tunnel in a matter of hours, and then there would be nothing to stop them but two iron gates, a few half-frozen corpses, and whatever brothers Jon cared to throw in their path, to fight and die down in the dark. To his left, the catapult made a thunk and filled the air with spinning stones . They plonked down on the turtle like hail, and caromed harmlessly aside . The wildling archers were still loosing arrows from behind their mantlets . One thudded into the face of a straw man, and Pyp said, Four for Watt of Long Lake! We have a tie! The next shaft whistled past his own ear, however . Fie! he shouted down . I ' m not in the tourney! Jon said, as much to himself as to the others . Their only hope was to try and crush the turtle when it reached the Wall . For that, they needed boulders . No matter how stoutly built the turtle was, a huge chunk of rock crashing straight down on top of it from seven hundred feet was bound to do some damage [BOS] The hides won ' t burn, Grenn, Owen, Kegs, it ' s time . [EOS]  Alongside the warming shed a dozen stout oaken barrels were lined up in a row . They were full of crushed rock; the gravel that the black brothers customarily spread on the footpaths to give themselves better footing atop the Wall . Yesterday, after he ' d seen the free folk covering the turtle with sheepskins, Jon told Grenn to pour water into the barrels, as much as they would take . The water would seep down through the crushed stone, and overnight the whole thing would freeze solid . It was the nearest thing to a boulder they were going to get. " Why do we need to freeze it? " Grenn had asked him . " Why don ' t we just roll the barrels off the way they are? " Jon answered, [BOS] If they crash against the Wall on the way down they ' ll burst, and loose gravel will spray everywhere . We don ' t want to rain pebbles on the whoresons . [EOS]  He put his shoulder to the one barrel with Grenn, while Kegs and Owen were wrestling with another . Together they rocked it back and forth to break the grip of the ice that had formed around its bottom . " The bugger weighs a ton, " said Grenn. Jon said [BOS] Tip it over and roll it, Careful, if it rolls over your foot you ' ll end up like Spare Boot . [EOS]  Once the barrel was on its side, Jon grabbed a torch and waved it above the surface of the Wall, back and forth, just enough to melt the ice a little . The thin film of water helped the barrel roll more easily . Too easily, in fact; they almost lost it . But finally, with four of them pooling their efforts, they rolled their boulder to the edge and stood it up again. They had four of the big oak barrels lined up above the gate by the time Pyp shouted, Jon braced his injured leg and leaned out for a look . Hoardings, Marsh should have built hoardings . So many things they should have done . The wildlings were dragging the dead giants away from the gate . Horse and Mully were dropping rocks down on them, and Jon thought he saw one man go down, but the stones were too small to have any effect on the turtle itself . He wondered what the free folk would do about the dead mammoth in the path, but then he saw . The turtle was almost as wide as a longhall, so they simply pushed it over the carcass . His leg twitched, but Horse caught his arm and drew him back to safety [BOS] There ' s a turtle at our door! You shouldn ' t lean out like that, [EOS] the boy said. " We should have built hoardings . " Jon thought he could hear the crash of axes on wood, but that was probably just fear ringing in his ears . He looked to Grenn . " Do it . " Grenn got behind a barrel, put his shoulder against it, grunted, and began to push . Owen and Mully moved to help him . They shoved the barrel out a foot, and then another . And suddenly it was gone. They heard the thump as it struck the Wall on the way down, and then, much louder, the crash and crack of splintering wood, followed by shouts and screams . Satin whooped and Owen the Oaf danced in circles, while Pyp leaned out and called, " The turtle was stuffed full of rabbits! Look at them hop away! " Jon barked, and Grenn and Kegs slammed their shoulders against the next barrel, and sent it tottering out into empty air [BOS] Again, [EOS]  By the time they were done, the front of Mance ' s turtle was a crushed and splintered ruin, and wildlings were spilling out the other end and scrambling for their camp . Satin scooped up his crossbow and sent a few quarrels after them as they ran, to see them off the faster . Grenn was grinning through his beard, Pyp was making japes, and none of them would die today. On the morrow, though . . . Jon glanced toward the shed . Eight barrels of gravel remained where twelve had stood a few moments before . He realized how tired he was then, and how much his wound was hurting . I need to sleep . A few hours, at least . He could go to Maester Aemon for some dreamwine, that would help . " I am going down to the King ' s Tower, " he told them . " Call me if Mance gets up to anything . Pyp, you have the Wall . " " Me? " said Pyp. " Him? " said Grenn. Smiling, he left them to it and rode down in the cage. A cup of dreamwine did help, as it happened . No sooner had he stretched out on the narrow bed in his cell than sleep took him . His dreams were strange and formless, full of strange voices, shouts and cries, and the sound of a warhorn, blowing low and loud, a single deep booming note that lingered in the air. When he awoke the sky was black outside the arrow slit that served him for a window, and four men he did not know were standing over him . One held a lantern . " Jon Snow, " the tallest of them said brusquely, " pull on your boots and come with us . " His first groggy thought was that somehow the Wall had fallen whilst he slept, that Mance Rayder had sent more giants or another turtle and broken through the gate . But when he rubbed his eyes he saw that the strangers were all in black . They ' re men of the Night ' s Watch, Jon realized . " Come where? Who are you? " The tall man gestured, and two of the others pulled Jon from the bed . With the lantern leading the way they marched him from his cell and up a half turn of stair, to the Old Bear ' s solar . He saw Maester Aemon standing by the fire, his hands folded around the head of a blackthorn cane . Septon Cellador was half drunk as usual, and Ser Wynton Stout was asleep in a window seat . The other brothers were strangers to him . All but one. Immaculate in his fur-trimmed cloak and polished boots, Ser Alliser Thorne turned to say, " Here ' s the turncloak now, my lord . Ned Stark ' s bastard, of Winterfell . " Jon said coldly [BOS] I ' m no turncloak, Thorne, [EOS]  We shall see . In the leather chair behind the table where the Old Bear wrote his letters sat a big, broad, jowly man Jon did not know . Yes, we shall see, he said again . You will not deny that you are Jon Snow, I hope? Stark ' s bastard? " Lord Snow, he likes to call himself . " Ser Alliser was a spare, slim man, compact and sinewy, and just now his flinty eyes were dark with amusement. " You ' re the one who named me Lord Snow, " said Jon . Ser Alliser had been fond of naming the boys he trained, during his time as Castle Black ' s master-at-arms . The Old Bear had sent Thorne to Eastwatch-by-the-Sea . These others must be Eastwatch men . The bird reached Cotter Pyke and he ' s sent us help . " How many men have you brought? " he asked the man behind the table. " It ' s me who ' ll ask the questions, " the jowly man replied . " You ' ve been charged with oathbreaking, cowardice, and desertion, Jon Snow . Do you deny that you abandoned your brothers to die on the Fist of the First Men and joined the wildling Mance Rayder, this self-styled King-beyond-the-Wall? " " Abandoned . . .? " Jon almost choked on the word. Maester Aemon spoke up then . " My lord, Donal Noye and I discussed these issues when Jon Snow first returned to us, and were satisfied by Jon ' s explanations . " " Well, I am not satisfied, Maester, " said the jowly man . " I will hear these explanations for myself . Yes I will! " Jon swallowed his anger [BOS] I abandoned no one . I left the Fist with Qhorin Halfhand to scout the Skirling Pass . I joined the wildlings under orders . The Halfhand feared that Mance might have found the Horn of Winter . . . [EOS]  " The Horn of Winter? " Ser Alliser chuckled . " Were you commanded to count their snarks as well, Lord Snow? " " No, but I counted their giants as best I could . " Ser, snapped the jowly man . You will address Ser Alliser as ser, and myself as m ' lord . I am Janos Slynt, Lord of Harrenhal, and commander here at Castle Black until such time as Bowen Marsh returns with his garrison . You will grant us our courtesies, yes . I will not suffer to hear an anointed knight like the good Ser Alliser mocked by a traitor ' s bastard . He raised a hand and pointed a meaty finger at Jon ' s face . Do you deny that you took a wildling woman into your bed? " No . " Jon ' s grief over Ygritte was too fresh for him to deny her now . " No, my lord . " " I suppose it was also the Halfhand who commanded you to fuck this unwashed whore? " Ser Alliser asked with a smirk. " Ser . She was no whore, ser . The Halfhand told me not to balk, whatever the wildlings asked of me, but . . . I will not deny that I went beyond what I had to do, that I . . . cared for her . " " You admit to being an oathbreaker, then, " said Janos Slynt. Half the men at Castle Black visited Mole ' s Town from time to time to dig for buried treasures in the brothel, Jon knew, but he would not dishonor Ygritte by equating her with the Mole ' s Town whores . " I broke my vows with a woman . I admit that . Yes . " " Yes, m ' lord! " When Slynt scowled, his jowls quivered . He was as broad as the Old Bear had been, and no doubt would be as bald if he lived to Mormont ' s age . Half his hair was gone already, though he could not have been more than forty. Jon said [BOS] Yes, my lord, I rode with the wildlings and ate with them, as the Halfhand commanded me, and I shared my furs with Ygritte . But I swear to you, I never turned my cloak . I escaped the Magnar as soon as I could, and never took up arms against my brothers or the realm . [EOS]  Lord Slynt ' s small eyes studied him . " Ser Glendon, " he commanded, " bring in the other prisoner . " Ser Glendon was the tall man who had dragged Jon from his bed . Four other men went with him when he left the room, but they were back soon enough with a captive, a small, sallow, battered man fettered hand and foot . He had a single eyebrow, a widow ' s peak, and a mustache that looked like a smear of dirt on his upper lip, but his face was swollen and mottled with bruises, and most of his front teeth had been knocked out. The Eastwatch men threw the captive roughly to the floor . Lord Slynt frowned down at him . " Is this the one you spoke of? " The captive blinked yellow eyes . Aye . Not until that instant did Jon recognize Rattleshirt . He is a different man without his armor, he thought . Aye, the wildling repeated, he ' s the craven killed the Halfhand . Up in the Frostfangs, it were, after we hunted down t ' other crows and killed them, every one . We would have done for this one too, only he begged f ' his worthless life, offered t ' join us if we ' d have him . The Halfhand swore he ' d see the craven dead first, but the wolf ripped Qhorin half t ' pieces and this one opened his throat . He gave Jon a cracktooth smile then, and spat blood on his foot. " Well? " Janos Slynt demanded of Jon harshly . " Do you deny it? Or will you claim Qhorin commanded you to kill him? " " He told me . . . " The words came hard . " He told me to do whatever they asked of me . " Slynt looked about the solar, at the other Eastwatch men . " Does this boy think I fell off a turnip wagon onto my head? " " Your lies won ' t save you now, Lord Snow, " warned Ser Alliser Thorne . " We ' ll have the truth from you, bastard . " " I ' ve told you the truth . Our garrons were failing, and Rattleshirt was close behind us . Qhorin told me to pretend to join the wildlings . ‘ You must not balk, whatever is asked of you, ' he said . He knew they would make me kill him . Rattleshirt was going to kill him anyway, he knew that too . " " So now you claim the great Qhorin Halfhand feared this creature? " Slynt looked at Rattleshirt, and snorted. " All men fear the Lord o ' Bones, " the wildling grumbled . Ser Glendon kicked him, and he lapsed back into silence. Jon insisted [BOS] I never said that, [EOS]  Slynt slammed a fist on the table . " I heard you! Ser Alliser had your measure true enough, it seems . You lie through your bastard ' s teeth . Well, I will not suffer it . I will not! You might have fooled this crippled blacksmith, but not Janos Slynt! Oh, no . Janos Slynt does not swallow lies so easily . Did you think my skull was stuffed with cabbage? " " I don ' t know what your skull is stuffed with . My lord . " " Lord Snow is nothing if not arrogant, " said Ser Alliser . " He murdered Qhorin just as his fellow turncloaks did Lord Mormont . It would not surprise me to learn that it was all part of the same fell plot . Benjen Stark may well have a hand in all this as well . For all we know, he is sitting in Mance Rayder ' s tent even now . You know these Starks, my lord . " " I do, " said Janos Slynt . " I know them too well . " Jon peeled off his glove and showed them his burned hand [BOS] I burned my hand defending Lord Mormont from a wight . And my uncle was a man of honor . He would never have betrayed his vows . [EOS]  " No more than you? " mocked Ser Alliser. Septon Cellador cleared his throat . " Lord Slynt, " he said, " this boy refused to swear his vows properly in the sept, but went beyond the Wall to say his words before a heart tree . His father ' s gods, he said, but they are wildling gods as well . " " They are the gods of the north, Septon . " Maester Aemon was courteous, but firm . " My lords, when Donal Noye was slain, it was this young man Jon Snow who took the Wall and held it, against all the fury of the north . He has proved himself valiant, loyal, and resourceful . Were it not for him, you would have found Mance Rayder sitting here when you arrived, Lord Slynt . You are doing him a great wrong . Jon Snow was Lord Mormont ' s own steward and squire . He was chosen for that duty because the Lord Commander saw much promise in him . As do I . " Promise? said Slynt . Well, promise may turn false . Qhorin Halfhand ' s blood is on his hands . Mormont trusted him, you say, but what of that? I know what it is to be betrayed by men you trusted . Oh, yes . And I know the ways of wolves as well . He pointed at Jon ' s face . Your father died a traitor. " My father was murdered . " Jon was past caring what they did to him, but he would not suffer any more lies about his father. Slynt purpled . " Murder? You insolent pup . King Robert was not even cold when Lord Eddard moved against his son . " He rose to his feet; a shorter man than Mormont, but thick about the chest and arms, with a gut to match . A small gold spear tipped with red enamel pinned his cloak at the shoulder . " Your father died by the sword, but he was highborn, a King ' s Hand . For you, a noose will serve . Ser Alliser, take this turncloak to an ice cell . " " My lord is wise . " Ser Alliser seized Jon by the arm. Jon yanked away and grabbed the knight by the throat with such ferocity that he lifted him off the floor . He would have throttled him if the Eastwatch men had not pulled him off . Thorne staggered back, rubbing the marks Jon ' s fingers had left on his neck [BOS] You see for yourselves, brothers . The boy is a wildling . [EOS]  The wind was blowing wild from the east, so strong the heavy cage would rock whenever a gust got it in its teeth . It skirled along the Wall, shivering off the ice, making Jon ' s cloak flap against the bars . The sky was slate grey, the sun no more than a faint patch of brightness behind the clouds . Across the killing ground, he could see the glimmer of a thousand campfires burning, but their lights seemed small and powerless against such gloom and cold. A grim day . Jon Snow wrapped gloved hands around the bars and held tight as the wind hammered at the cage once more . When he looked straight down past his feet, the ground was lost in shadow, as if he were being lowered into some bottomless pit . Well, death is a bottomless pit of sorts, he reflected, and when this day ' s work is done my name will be shadowed forever. Bastard children were born from lust and lies, men said; their nature was wanton and treacherous . Once Jon had meant to prove them wrong, to show his lord father that he could be as good and true a son as Robb . I made a botch of that . Robb had become a hero king; if Jon was remembered at all, it would be as a turncloak, an oathbreaker, and a murderer . He was glad that Lord Eddard was not alive to see his shame. I should have stayed in that cave with Ygritte . If there was a life beyond this one, he hoped to tell her that . She will claw my face the way the eagle did, and curse me for a coward, but I ' ll tell her all the same . He flexed his sword hand, as Maester Aemon had taught him . The habit had become part of him, and he would need his fingers to be limber to have even half a chance of murdering Mance Rayder. They had pulled him out this morning, after four days in the ice, locked up in a cell five by five by five, too low for him to stand, too tight for him to stretch out on his back . The stewards had long ago discovered that food and meat kept longer in the icy storerooms carved from the base of the Wall . . . but prisoners did not . " You will die in here, Lord Snow, " Ser Alliser had said just before he closed the heavy wooden door, and Jon had believed it . But this morning they had come and pulled him out again, and marched him cramped and shivering back to the King ' s Tower, to stand before jowly Janos Slynt once more " That old maester says I cannot hang you, " Slynt declared . " He has written Cotter Pyke, and even had the bloody gall to show me the letter . He says you are no turncloak . " " Aemon ' s lived too long, my lord, " Ser Alliser assured him . " His wits have gone dark as his eyes . " " Aye, " Slynt said . " A blind man with a chain about his neck, who does he think he is? " Aemon Targaryen, Jon thought, a king ' s son and a king ' s brother and a king who might have been . But he said nothing. Still, Slynt said, I will not have it said that Janos Slynt hanged a man unjustly . I will not . I have decided to give you one last chance to prove you are as loyal as you claim, Lord Snow . One last chance to do your duty, yes! He stood . Mance Rayder wants to parley with us . He knows he has no chance now that Janos Slynt has come, so he wants to talk, this King-beyond-the-Wall . But the man is craven, and will not come to us . No doubt he knows I ' d hang him . Hang him by his feet from the top of the Wall, on a rope two hundred feet long! But he will not come . He asks that we send an envoy to him. " We ' re sending you, Lord Snow . " Ser Alliser smiled. " Me . " Jon ' s voice was flat . " Why me? " " You rode with these wildlings, " said Thorne . " Mance Rayder knows you . He will be more inclined to trust you . " That was so wrong Jon might have laughed . " You ' ve got it backward . Mance suspected me from the first . If I show up in his camp wearing a black cloak again and speaking for the Night ' s Watch, he ' ll know that I betrayed him . " " He asked for an envoy, we are sending one, " said Slynt . " If you are too craven to face this turncloak king, we can return you to your ice cell . This time without the furs, I think . Yes . " " No need for that, my lord, " said Ser Alliser . " Lord Snow will do as we ask . He wants to show us that he is no turncloak . He wants to prove himself a loyal man of the Night ' s Watch . " Thorne was much the more clever of the two, Jon realized; this had his stink all over it . He was trapped . " I ' ll go, " he said in a clipped, curt voice. " M ' lord, " Janos Slynt reminded him . " You ' ll address me— " " I ' ll go, my lord . But you are making a mistake, my lord . You are sending the wrong man, my lord . Just the sight of me is going to anger Mance . My lord would have a better chance of reaching terms if he sent— " " Terms? " Ser Alliser chuckled. " Janos Slynt does not make terms with lawless savages, Lord Snow . No, he does not . " " We ' re not sending you to talk with Mance Rayder, " Ser Alliser said . " We ' re sending you to kill him . " The wind whistled through the bars, and Jon Snow shivered . His leg was throbbing, and his head . He was not fit to kill a kitten, yet here he was . The trap had teeth . With Maester Aemon insisting on Jon ' s innocence, Lord Janos had not dared to leave him in the ice to die . This was better . " Our honor means no more than our lives, so long as the realm is safe, " Qhorin Halfhand had said in the Frostfangs . He must remember that . Whether he slew Mance or only tried and failed, the free folk would kill him . Even desertion was impossible, if he ' d been so inclined; to Mance he was a proven liar and betrayer. When the cage jerked to a halt, Jon swung down onto the ground and rattled Longclaw ' s hilt to loosen the bastard blade in its scabbard . The gate was a few yards to his left, still blocked by the splintered ruins of the turtle, the carcass of a mammoth ripening within . There were other corpses too, strewn amidst broken barrels, hardened pitch, and patches of burnt grass, all shadowed by the Wall . Jon had no wish to linger here . He started walking toward the wildling camp, past the body of a dead giant whose head had been crushed by a stone . A raven was pulling out bits of brain from the giant ' s shattered skull . It looked up as he walked by . " Snow, " it screamed at him . " Snow, snow . " Then it opened its wings and flew away. No sooner had he started out than a lone rider emerged from the wildling camp and came toward him . He wondered if Mance was coming out to parley in no-man ' s-land . That might make it easier, though nothing will make it easy . But as the distance between them diminished Jon saw that the horseman was short and broad, with gold rings glinting on thick arms and a white beard spreading out across his massive chest. " Har! " Tormund boomed when they came together . " Jon Snow the crow . I feared we ' d seen the last o ' you . " " I never knew you feared anything, Tormund . " That made the wildling grin . " Well said, lad . I see your cloak is black . Mance won ' t like that . If you ' ve come to change sides again, best climb back on that Wall o ' yours . " " They ' ve sent me to treat with the King-beyond-the-Wall . " " Treat? " Tormund laughed . " Now there ' s a word . Har! Mance wants to talk, that ' s true enough . Can ' t say he ' d want to talk with you, though . " " I ' m the one they ' ve sent . " " I see that . Best come along, then . You want to ride? " " I can walk . " " You fought us hard here . " Tormund turned his garron back toward the wildling camp . " You and your brothers . I give you that . Two hundred dead, and a dozen giants . Mag himself went in that gate o ' yours and never did come out . " " He died on the sword of a brave man named Donal Noye . " " Aye? Some great lord was he, this Donal Noye? One of your shiny knights in their steel smallclothes? " " A blacksmith . He only had one arm . " " A one-armed smith slew Mag the Mighty? Har! That must o ' been a fight to see . Mance will make a song of it, see if he don ' t. " Tormund took a waterskin off his saddle and pulled the cork . " This will warm us some . To Donal Noye, and Mag the Mighty . " He took a swing, and handed it down to Jon. " To Donal Noye, and Mag the Mighty . " The skin was full of mead, but a mead so potent that it made Jon ' s eyes water and sent tendrils of fire snaking through his chest . After the ice cell and the cold ride down in the cage, the warmth was welcome. Tormund took the skin back and downed another swig, then wiped his mouth . " The Magnar of Thenn swore t ' us that he ' d have the gate wide open, so all we ' d need to do was stroll through singing . He was going to bring the whole Wall down . " Jon said [BOS] He brought down part, On his head . [EOS]  Har! said Tormund . Well, I never had much use for Styr . When a man ' s got no beard nor hair nor ears, you can ' t get a good grip on him when you fight . He kept his horse at a slow walk so Jon could limp beside him . What happened to that leg? " An arrow . One of Ygritte ' s, I think . " " That ' s a woman for you . One day she ' s kissing you, the next she ' s filling you with arrows . " " She ' s dead . " Aye? Tormund gave a sad shake of the head . A waste . If I ' d been ten years younger, I ' d have stolen her meself . That hair she had . Well, the hottest fires burn out quickest . He lifted the skin of mead . To Ygritte, kissed by fire! He drank deep. Jon repeated when Tormund handed him back the skin . He drank even deeper [BOS] To Ygritte, kissed by fire, [EOS]  " Was it you killed her? " " My brother . " Jon had never learned which one, and hoped he never would. " You bloody crows . " Tormund ' s tone was gruff, yet strangely gentle . " That Longspear stole me daughter . Munda, me little autumn apple . Took her right out o ' my tent with all four o ' her brothers about . Toregg slept through it, the great lout, and Torwynd . . . well, Torwynd the Tame, that says all that needs saying, don ' t it? The young ones gave the lad a fight, though . " " And Munda? " asked Jon. " She ' s my own blood, " said Tormund proudly . " She broke his lip for him and bit one ear half off, and I hear he ' s got so many scratches on his back he can ' t wear a cloak . She likes him well enough, though . And why not? He don ' t fight with no spear, you know . Never has . So where do you think he got that name? Har! " Jon had to laugh . Even now, even here . Ygritte had been fond of Longspear Ryk . He hoped he found some joy with Tormund ' s Munda . Someone needed to find some joy somewhere. You know nothing, Jon Snow, Ygritte would have told him . I know that I am going to die, he thought . I know that much, at least . All men die, he could almost hear her say, and women too, and every beast that flies or swims or runs . It ' s not the when o ' dying that matters, it ' s the how of it, Jon Snow . Easy for you to say, he thought back . You died brave in battle, storming the castle of a foe . I ' m going to die a turncloak and a killer . Nor would his death be quick, unless it came on the end of Mance ' s sword. Soon they were among the tents . It was the usual wildling camp; a sprawling jumble of cookfires and piss pits, children and goats wandering freely, sheep bleating among the trees, horse hides pegged up to dry . There was no plan to it, no order, no defenses . But there were men and women and animals everywhere. Many ignored him, but for every one who went about his business there were ten who stopped to stare; children squatting by the fires, old women in dog carts, cave dwellers with painted faces, raiders with claws and snakes and severed heads painted on their shields, all turned to have a look . Jon saw spearwives too, their long hair streaming in the piney wind that sighed between the trees. There were no true hills here, but Mance Rayder ' s white fur tent had been raised on a spot of high stony ground right on the edge of the trees . The King-beyond-the-Wall was waiting outside, his ragged red-and-black cloak blowing in the wind . Harma Dogshead was with him, Jon saw, back from her raids and feints along the Wall, and Varamyr Sixskins as well, attended by his shadowcat and two lean grey wolves. When they saw who the Watch had sent, Harma turned her head and spat, and one of Varamyr ' s wolves bared its teeth and growled . " You must be very brave or very stupid, Jon Snow, " Mance Rayder said, " to come back to us wearing a black cloak . " " What else would a man of the Night ' s Watch wear? " " Kill him, " urged Harma . " Send his body back up in that cage o ' theirs and tell them to send us someone else . I ' ll keep his head for my standard . A turncloak ' s worse than a dog . " " I warned you he was false . " Varamyr ' s tone was mild, but his shadow-cat was staring at Jon hungrily through slitted grey eyes . " I never did like the smell o ' him . " " Pull in your claws, beastling . " Tormund Giantsbane swung down off his horse . " The lad ' s here to hear . You lay a paw on him, might be I ' ll take me that shadowskin cloak I been wanting . " " Tormund Crowlover, " Harma sneered . " You are a great sack o ' wind, old man . " The skinchanger was grey-faced, round-shouldered, and bald, a mouse of a man with a wolfling ' s eyes . " Once a horse is broken to the saddle, any man can mount him, " he said in a soft voice . " Once a beast ' s been joined to a man, any skinchanger can slip inside and ride him . Orell was withering inside his feathers, so I took the eagle for my own . But the joining works both ways, warg . Orell lives inside me now, whispering how much he hates you . And I can soar above the Wall, and see with eagle eyes . " So we know, said Mance . We know how few you were, when you stopped the turtle . We know how many came from Eastwatch . We know how your supplies have dwindled . Pitch, oil, arrows, spears . Even your stair is gone, and that cage can only lift so many . We know . And now you know we know . He opened the flap of the tent . Come inside . The rest of you, wait here. " What, even me? " said Tormund. " Particularly you . Always . " It was warm within . A small fire burned beneath the smoke holes, and a brazier smouldered near the pile of furs where Dalla lay, pale and sweating . Her sister was holding her hand . Val, Jon remembered . " I was sorry when Jarl fell, " he told her. Val looked at him with pale grey eyes . " He always climbed too fast . " She was as fair as he ' d remembered, slender, full-breasted, graceful even at rest, with high sharp cheekbones and a thick braid of honey-colored hair that fell to her waist. " Dalla ' s time is near, " Mance explained . " She and Val will stay . They know what I mean to say . " Jon kept his face as still as ice . Foul enough to slay a man in his own tent under truce . Must I murder him in front of his wife as their child is being born? He closed the fingers of his sword hand . Mance was not wearing armor, but his own sword was sheathed on his left hip . And there were other weapons in the tent, daggers and dirks, a bow and a quiver of arrows, a bronze-headed spear lying beside that big black . . . . . . horn. Jon sucked in his breath. A warhorn, a bloody great warhorn. " Yes, " Mance said . " The Horn of Winter, that Joramun once blew to wake giants from the earth . " The horn was huge, eight feet along the curve and so wide at the mouth that he could have put his arm inside up to the elbow . If this came from an aurochs, it was the biggest that ever lived . At first he thought the bands around it were bronze, but when he moved closer he realized they were gold . Old gold, more brown than yellow, and graven with runes. " Ygritte said you never found the horn . " " Did you think only crows could lie? I liked you well enough, for a bastard . . . but I never trusted you . A man needs to earn my trust . " Jon faced him [BOS] If you ' ve had the Horn of Joramun all along, why haven ' t you used it? Why bother building turtles and sending Thenns to kill us in our beds? If this horn is all the songs say, why not just sound it and be done? [EOS]  It was Dalla who answered him, Dalla great with child, lying on her pile of furs beside the brazier . " We free folk know things you kneelers have forgotten . Sometimes the short road is not the safest, Jon Snow . The Horned Lord once said that sorcery is a sword without a hilt . There is no safe way to grasp it . " Mance ran a hand along the curve of the great horn . " No man goes hunting with only one arrow in his quiver, " he said . " I had hoped that Styr and Jarl would take your brothers unawares, and open the gate for us . I drew your garrison away with feints and raids and secondary attacks . Bowen Marsh swallowed that lure as I knew he would, but your band of cripples and orphans proved to be more stubborn than anticipated . Don ' t think you ' ve stopped us, though . The truth is, you are too few and we are too many . I could continue the attack here and still send ten thousand men to cross the Bay of Seals on rafts and take Eastwatch from the rear . I could storm the Shadow Tower too, I know the approaches as well as any man alive . I could send men and mammoths to dig out the gates at the castles you ' ve abandoned, all of them at once . " " Why don ' t you, then? " Jon could have drawn Longclaw then, but he wanted to hear what the wildling had to say. " Blood, " said Mance Rayder . " I ' d win in the end, yes, but you ' d bleed me, and my people have bled enough . " " Your losses haven ' t been that heavy . " " Not at your hands . " Mance studied Jon ' s face . " You saw the Fist of the First Men . You know what happened there . You know what we are facing . " " The Others . . . " " They grow stronger as the days grow shorter and the nights colder . First they kill you, then they send your dead against you . The giants have not been able to stand against them, nor the Thenns, the ice river clans, the Hornfoots . " " Nor you? " Nor me . There was anger in that admission, and bitterness too deep for words . Raymun Redbeard, Bael the Bard, Gendel and Gorne, the Horned Lord, they all came south to conquer, but I ' ve come with my tail between my legs to hide behind your Wall . He touched the horn again . If I sound the Horn of Winter, the Wall will fall . Or so the songs would have me believe . There are those among my people who want nothing more . . . " But once the Wall is fallen, " Dalla said, " what will stop the Others? " Mance gave her a fond smile . " It ' s a wise woman I ' ve found . A true queen . " He turned back to Jon . " Go back and tell them to open their gate and let us pass . If they do, I will give them the horn, and the Wall will stand until the end of days . " Open the gate and let them pass . Easy to say, but what must follow? Giants camping in the ruins of Winterfell? Cannibals in the wolfswood, chariots sweeping across the barrowlands, free folk stealing the daughters of shipwrights and silversmiths from White Harbor and fishwives off the Stony Shore? Jon asked suddenly [BOS] Are you a true king? [EOS]  " I ' ve never had a crown on my head or sat my arse on a bloody throne, if that ' s what you ' re asking, " Mance replied . " My birth is as low as a man ' s can get, no septon ' s ever smeared my head with oils, I don ' t own any castles, and my queen wears furs and amber, not silk and sapphires . I am my own champion, my own fool, and my own harpist . You don ' t become King-beyond-the-Wall because your father was . The free folk won ' t follow a name, and they don ' t care which brother was born first . They follow fighters . When I left the Shadow Tower there were five men making noises about how they might be the stuff of kings . Tormund was one, the Magnar another . The other three I slew, when they made it plain they ' d sooner fight than follow . " Jon said bluntly, [BOS] You can kill your enemies, but can you rule your friends? If we let your people pass, are you strong enough to make them keep the king ' s peace and obey the laws? [EOS]  " Whose laws? The laws of Winterfell and King ' s Landing? " Mance laughed . " When we want laws we ' ll make our own . You can keep your king ' s justice too, and your king ' s taxes . I ' m offering you the horn, not our freedom . We will not kneel to you . " " What if we refuse the offer? " Jon had no doubt that they would . The Old Bear might at least have listened, though he would have balked at the notion of letting thirty or forty thousand wildlings loose on the Seven Kingdoms . But Alliser Thorne and Janos Slynt would dismiss the notion out of hand. " If you refuse, " Mance Rayder said, " Tormund Giantsbane will sound the Horn of Winter three days hence, at dawn . " He could carry the message back to Castle Black and tell them of the horn, but if he left Mance still alive Lord Janos and Ser Alliser would seize on that as proof that he was a turncloak . A thousand thoughts flickered through Jon ' s head . If I can destroy the horn, smash it here and now . . . but before he could begin to think that through, he heard the low moan of some other horn, made faint by the tent ' s hide walls . Mance heard it too . Frowning, he went to the door . Jon followed. The warhorn was louder outside . Its call had stirred the wildling camp . Three Hornfoot men jogged past, carrying long spears . Horses were whinnying and snorting, giants roaring in the Old Tongue, and even the mammoths were restless. " Outrider ' s horn, " Tormund told Mance. " Something ' s coming . " Varamyr sat crosslegged on the half-frozen ground, his wolves circled restlessly around him . A shadow swept over him, and Jon looked up to see the eagle ' s blue-grey wings . " Coming, from the east . " When the dead walk, walls and stakes and swords mean nothing, he remembered . You cannot fight the dead, Jon Snow . No man knows that half so well as me. Harma scowled . " East? The wights should be behind us . " " East, " the skinchanger repeated . " Something ' s coming . " Jon asked [BOS] The Others? [EOS]  Mance shook his head . The Others never come when the sun is up . Chariots were rattling across the killing ground, jammed with riders waving spears of sharpened bone . The king groaned . Where the bloody hell do they think they ' re going? Quenn, get those fools back where they belong . Someone bring my horse . The mare, not the stallion . I ' ll want my armor too . Mance glanced suspiciously at the Wall . Atop the icy parapets, the straw soldiers stood collecting arrows, but there was no sign of any other activity . Harma, mount up your raiders . Tormund, find your sons and give me a triple line of spears. " Aye, " said Tormund, striding off. The mousy little skinchanger closed his eyes and said, " I see them . They ' re coming along the streams and game trails . . . " " Men . Men on horses . Men in steel and men in black . " " Crows . " Mance made the word a curse . He turned on Jon . " Did my old brothers think they ' d catch me with my breeches down if they attacked while we were talking? " " If they planned an attack they never told me about it . " Jon did not believe it . Lord Janos lacked the men to attack the wildling camp . Besides, he was on the wrong side of the Wall, and the gate was sealed with rubble . He had a different sort of treachery in mind, this can ' t be his work. " If you ' re lying to me again, you won ' t be leaving here alive, " Mance warned . His guards brought him his horse and armor . Elsewhere around the camp, Jon saw people running at cross purposes, some men forming up as if to storm the Wall while others slipped into the woods, women driving dog carts east, mammoths wandering west . He reached back over his shoulder and drew Longclaw just as a thin line of rangers emerged from the fringes of the wood three hundred yards away . They wore black mail, black halfhelms, and black cloaks . Half-armored, Mance drew his sword . " You knew nothing of this, did you? " he said to Jon, coldly. Slow as honey on a cold morning, the rangers swept down on the wildling camp, picking their way through clumps of gorse and stands of trees, over roots and rocks . Wildlings flew to meet them, shouting war cries and waving clubs and bronze swords and axes made of flint, galloping headlong at their ancient enemies . A shout, a slash, and a fine brave death, Jon had heard brothers say of the free folk ' s way of fighting. Jon told the King-beyond-the-Wall, [BOS] Believe what you will, but I knew nothing of any attack . [EOS]  Harma thundered past before Mance could reply, riding at the head of thirty raiders . Her standard went before her; a dead dog impaled on a spear, raining blood at every stride . Mance watched as she smashed into the rangers . " Might be you ' re telling it true, " he said . " Those look like Eastwatch men . Sailors on horses . Cotter Pyke always had more guts than sense . He took the Lord of Bones at Long Barrow, he might have thought to do the same with me . If so, he ' s a fool . He doesn ' t have the men, he— " " Mance! " the shout came . It was a scout, bursting from the trees on a lathered horse . " Mance, there ' s more, they ' re all around us, iron men, iron, a host of iron men . " Cursing, Mance swung up into the saddle . " Varamyr, stay and see that no harm comes to Dalla . " The King-beyond-the-Wall pointed his sword at Jon . " And keep a few extra eyes on this crow . If he runs, rip out his throat . " Aye, I ' ll do that . The skinchanger was a head shorter than Jon, slumped and soft, but that shadowcat could disembowel him with one paw . They ' re coming from the north too, Varamyr told Mance . You best go. Mance donned his helm with its raven wings . His men were mounted up as well . " Arrowhead, " Mance snapped, " to me, form wedge . " Yet when he slammed his heels into the mare and flew across the field at the rangers, the men who raced to catch him lost all semblance of formation. Jon took a step toward the tent, thinking of the Horn of Winter, but the shadowcat blocked him, tail lashing . The beast ' s nostrils flared, and slaver ran from his curved front teeth . He smells my fear . He missed Ghost more than ever then . The two wolves were behind him, growling. Banners, he heard Varamyr murmur, I see golden banners, oh . . . A mammoth lumbered by, trumpeting, a half-dozen bowmen in the wooden tower on its back . The king . . . no . . . Then the skinchanger threw back his head and screamed. The sound was shocking, ear-piercing, thick with agony . Varamyr fell, writhing, and the ' cat was screaming too . . . and high, high in the eastern sky, against the wall of cloud, Jon saw the eagle burning . For a heartbeat it flamed brighter than a star, wreathed in red and gold and orange, its wings beating wildly at the air as if it could fly from the pain . Higher it flew, and higher, and higher still. The scream brought Val out of the tent, white-faced . What is it, what ' s happened? Varamyr ' s wolves were fighting each other, and the shadowcat had raced off into the trees, but the man was still twisting on the ground . What ' s wrong with him? Val demanded, horrified . Where ' s Mance? Jon pointed [BOS] There . Gone to fight . [EOS] The king led his ragged wedge into a knot of rangers, his sword flashing. " Gone? He can ' t be gone, not now . It ' s started . " " The battle? " He watched the rangers scatter before Harma ' s bloody dog ' s head . The raiders screamed and hacked and chased the men in black back into the trees . But there were more men coming from the wood, a column of horse . Knights on heavy horse, Jon saw . Harma had to regroup and wheel to meet them, but half of her men had raced too far ahead. " The birth! " Val was shouting at him. Trumpets were blowing all around, loud and brazen . The wildlings have no trumpets, only warhorns . They knew that as well as he did; the sound sent free folk running in confusion, some toward the fighting, others away . A mammoth was stomping through a flock of sheep that three men were trying to herd off west . The drums were beating as the wildlings ran to form squares and lines, but they were too late, too disorganized, too slow . The enemy was emerging from the forest, from the east, the northeast, the north; three great columns of heavy horse, all dark glinting steel and bright wool surcoats . Not the men of Eastwatch, those had been no more than a line of scouts . An army . The king? Jon was as confused as the wildlings . Could Robb have returned? Had the boy on the Iron Throne finally bestirred himself? " You best get back inside the tent, " he told Val. Across the field one column had washed over Harma Dogshead . Another smashed into the flank of Tormund ' s spearmen as he and his sons desperately tried to turn them . The giants were climbing onto their mammoths, though, and the knights on their barded horses did not like that at all; he could see how the coursers and destriers screamed and scattered at the sight of those lumbering mountains . But there was fear on the wildling side as well, hundreds of women and children rushing away from the battle, some of them blundering right under the hooves of garrons . He saw an old woman ' s dog cart veer into the path of three chariots, to send them crashing into each other. " Gods, " Val whispered, " gods, why are they doing this? " " Go inside the tent and stay with Dalla . It ' s not safe out here . " It wouldn ' t be a great deal safer inside, but she didn ' t need to hear that. " I need to find the midwife, " Val said. " You ' re the midwife . I ' ll stay here until Mance comes back . " He had lost sight of Mance but now he found him again, cutting his way through a knot of mounted men . The mammoths had shattered the center column, but the other two were closing like pincers . On the eastern edge of the camps, some archers were loosing fire arrows at the tents . He saw a mammoth pluck a knight from his saddle and fling him forty feet with a flick of its trunk . Wildlings streamed past, women and children running from the battle, some with men hurrying them along . A few of them gave Jon dark looks but Longclaw was in his hand, and no one troubled him . Even Varamyr fled, crawling off on his hands and knees. More and more men were pouring from the trees, not only knights now but freeriders and mounted bowmen and men-at-arms in jacks and kettle helms, dozens of men, hundreds of men . A blaze of banners flew above them . The wind was whipping them too wildly for Jon to see the sigils, but he glimpsed a seahorse, a field of birds, a ring of flowers . And yellow, so much yellow, yellow banners with a red device, whose arms were those? East and north and northeast, he saw bands of wildlings trying to stand and fight, but the attackers rode right over them . The free folk still had the numbers, but the attackers had steel armor and heavy horses . In the thickest part of the fray, Jon saw Mance standing tall in his stirrups . His red-and-black cloak and raven-winged helm made him easy to pick out . He had his sword raised and men were rallying to him when a wedge of knights smashed into them with lance and sword and longaxe . Mance ' s mare went up on her hind legs, kicking, and a spear took her through the breast . Then the steel tide washed over him. It ' s done, Jon thought, they ' re breaking . The wildlings were running, throwing down their weapons, Hornfoot men and cave dwellers and Thenns in bronze scales, they were running . Mance was gone, someone was waving Harma ' s head on a pole, Tormund ' s lines had broken . Only the giants on their mammoths were holding, hairy islands in a red steel sea . The fires were leaping from tent to tent and some of the tall pines were going up as well . And through the smoke another wedge of armored riders came, on barded horses . Floating above them were the largest banners yet, royal standards as big as sheets; a yellow one with long pointed tongues that showed a flaming heart, and another like a sheet of beaten gold, with a black stag prancing and rippling in the wind. Robert, Jon thought for one mad moment, remembering poor Owen, but when the trumpets blew again and the knights charged, the name they cried was " Stannis! Stannis! STANNIS! " Jon turned away, and went inside the tent. Jon prowled around Satin in a slow circle, sword in hand, forcing him to turn [BOS] Get your shield up, [EOS] he said. " It ' s too heavy, " the Oldtown boy complained. It ' s as heavy as it needs to be to stop a sword, Jon said . Now get it up . He stepped forward, slashing . Satin jerked the shield up in time to catch the sword on its rim, and swung his own blade at Jon ' s ribs . Good, Jon said, when he felt the impact on his own shield . That was good . But you need to put your body into it . Get your weight behind the steel and you ' ll do more damage than with arm strength alone . Come, try it again, drive at me, but keep the shield up or I ' ll ring your head like a bell . . . Instead Satin took a step backward and raised his visor . " Jon, " he said, in an anxious voice. When he turned, she was standing behind him, with half a dozen queen ' s men around her . Small wonder the yard grew so quiet . He had glimpsed Melisandre at her nightfires, and coming and going about the castle, but never so close . She ' s beautiful, he thought . . . but there was something more than a little unsettling about red eyes . " My lady . " " The king would speak with you, Jon Snow . " Jon thrust the practice sword into the earth [BOS] Might I be allowed to change? I am in no fit state to stand before a king . [EOS]  " We shall await you atop the Wall, " said Melisandre . We, Jon heard, not he . It ' s as they say . This is his true queen, not the one he left at Eastwatch. He hung his mail and plate inside the armory, returned to his own cell, discarded his sweat-stained clothes, and donned a fresh set of blacks . It would be cold and windy in the cage, he knew, and colder and windier still on top of the ice, so he chose a heavy hooded cloak . Last of all he collected Longclaw, and slung the bastard sword across his back. Melisandre was waiting for him at the base of the Wall . She had sent her queen ' s men away . Jon asked her as they entered the cage [BOS] What does His Grace want of me? [EOS]  " All you have to give, Jon Snow . He is a king . " He shut the door and pulled the bell cord . The winch began to turn . They rose . The day was bright and the Wall was weeping, long fingers of water trickling down its face and glinting in the sun . In the close confines of the iron cage, he was acutely aware of the red woman ' s presence . She even smells red . The scent reminded him of Mikken ' s forge, of the way iron smelled when red-hot; the scent was smoke and blood . Kissed by fire, he thought, remembering Ygritte . The wind got in amongst Melisandre ' s long red robes and sent them flapping against Jon ' s legs as he stood beside her . " You are not cold, my lady? " he asked her. She laughed . Never . The ruby at her throat seemed to pulse, in time with the beating of her heart . The Lord ' s fire lives within me, Jon Snow . Feel . She put her hand on his cheek, and held it there while he felt how warm she was . That is how life should feel, she told him . Only death is cold. They found Stannis Baratheon standing alone at the edge of the Wall, brooding over the field where he had won his battle, and the great green forest beyond . He was dressed in the same black breeches, tunic, and boots that a brother of the Night ' s Watch might wear . Only his cloak set him apart; a heavy golden cloak trimmed in black fur, and pinned with a brooch in the shape of a flaming heart . " I have brought you the Bastard of Winterfell, Your Grace, " said Melisandre. Stannis turned to study him . Beneath his heavy brow were eyes like bottomless blue pools . His hollow cheeks and strong jaw were covered with a short-cropped blue-black beard that did little to conceal the gauntness of his face, and his teeth were clenched . His neck and shoulders were clenched as well, and his right hand . Jon found himself remembering something Donal Noye once said about the Baratheon brothers . Robert was the true steel . Stannis is pure iron, black and hard and strong, but brittle, the way iron gets . He ' ll break before he bends . Uneasily, he knelt, wondering why this brittle king had need of him. " Rise . I have heard much and more of you, Lord Snow . " " I am no lord, sire . " Jon rose . " I know what you have heard . That I am a turncloak, and craven . That I slew my brother Qhorin Halfhand so the wildlings would spare my life . That I rode with Mance Rayder, and took a wildling wife . " " Aye . All that, and more . You are a warg too, they say, a skinchanger who walks at night as a wolf . " King Stannis had a hard smile . " How much of it is true? " " I had a direwolf, Ghost . I left him when I climbed the Wall near Greyguard, and have not seen him since . Qhorin Halfhand commanded me to join the wildlings . He knew they would make me kill him to prove myself, and told me to do whatever they asked of me . The woman was named Ygritte . I broke my vows with her, but I swear to you on my father ' s name that I never turned my cloak . " " I believe you, " the king said. That startled him . " Why? " Stannis snorted . " I know Janos Slynt . And I knew Ned Stark as well . Your father was no friend of mine, but only a fool would doubt his honor or his honesty . You have his look . " A big man, Stannis Baratheon towered over Jon, but he was so gaunt that he looked ten years older than he was . " I know more than you might think, Jon Snow . I know it was you who found the dragonglass dagger that Randyll Tarly ' s son used to slay the Other . " " Ghost found it . The blade was wrapped in a ranger ' s cloak and buried beneath the Fist of the First Men . There were other blades as well . . . spearheads, arrowheads, all dragonglass . " " I know you held the gate here, " King Stannis said . " If not, I would have come too late . " " Donal Noye held the gate . He died below in the tunnel, fighting the king of the giants . " Stannis grimaced . " Noye made my first sword for me, and Robert ' s warhammer as well . Had the god seen fit to spare him, he would have made a better Lord Commander for your order than any of these fools who are squabbling over it now . " Jon said [BOS] Cotter Pyke and Ser Denys Mallister are no fools, sire, They ' re good men, and capable . Othell Yarwyck as well, in his own way . Lord Mormont trusted each of them . [EOS]  " Your Lord Mormont trusted too easily . Else he would not have died as he did . But we were speaking of you . I have not forgotten that it was you who brought us this magic horn, and captured Mance Rayder ' s wife and son . " Dalla died . Jon was saddened by that still . Val is her sister . She and the babe did not require much capturing, Your Grace . You had put the wildlings to flight, and the skinchanger Mance had left to guard his queen went mad when the eagle burned . Jon looked at Melisandre . Some say that was your doing. She smiled, her long copper hair tumbling across her face . " The Lord of Light has fiery talons, Jon Snow . " Jon nodded, and turned back to the king [BOS] Your Grace, you spoke of Val . She has asked to see Mance Rayder, to bring his son to him . It would be a . . . a kindness . [EOS]  " The man is a deserter from your order . Your brothers are all insisting on his death . Why should I do him a kindness? " Jon had no answer for that [BOS] If not for him, for Val . For her sister ' s sake, the child ' s mother . [EOS]  " You are fond of this Val? " " I scarcely know her . " " They tell me she is comely . " Jon admitted [BOS] Very, [EOS]  " Beauty can be treacherous . My brother learned that lesson from Cersei Lannister . She murdered him, do not doubt it . Your father and Jon Arryn as well . " He scowled . " You rode with these wildlings . Is there any honor in them, do you think? " Jon said, [BOS] Yes, but their own sort of honor, sire . [EOS]  " In Mance Rayder? " " Yes . I think so . " " In the Lord of Bones? " Jon hesitated [BOS] Rattleshirt, we called him . Treacherous and blood-thirsty . If there ' s honor in him, he hides it down beneath his suit of bones . [EOS]  " And this other man, this Tormund of the many names who eluded us after the battle? Answer me truly . " " Tormund Giantsbane seemed to me the sort of man who would make a good friend and a bad enemy, Your Grace . " Stannis gave a curt nod . " Your father was a man of honor . He was no friend to me, but I saw his worth . Your brother was a rebel and a traitor who meant to steal half my kingdom, but no man can question his courage . What of you? " Does he want me to say I love him? Jon ' s voice was stiff and formal as he said, " I am a man of the Night ' s Watch . " " Words . Words are wind . Why do you think I abandoned Dragonstone and sailed to the Wall, Lord Snow? " " I am no lord, sire . You came because we sent for you, I hope . Though I could not say why you took so long about it . " Surprisingly, Stannis smiled at that . " You ' re bold enough to be a Stark . Yes, I should have come sooner . If not for my Hand, I might not have come at all . Lord Seaworth is a man of humble birth, but he reminded me of my duty, when all I could think of was my rights . I had the cart before the horse, Davos said . I was trying to win the throne to save the kingdom, when I should have been trying to save the kingdom to win the throne . " Stannis pointed north . " There is where I ' ll find the foe that I was born to fight . " " His name may not be spoken, " Melisandre added softly . " He is the God of Night and Terror, Jon Snow, and these shapes in the snow are his creatures . " " They tell me that you slew one of these walking corpses to save Lord Mormont ' s life, " Stannis said . " It may be that this is your war as well, Lord Snow . If you will give me your help . " " My sword is pledged to the Night ' s Watch, Your Grace, " Jon Snow answered carefully. That did not please the king . Stannis ground his teeth and said, " I need more than a sword from you . " Jon was lost [BOS] My lord? [EOS]  " I need the north . " The north . " I . . . my brother Robb was King in the North . . . " " Your brother was the rightful Lord of Winterfell . If he had stayed home and done his duty, instead of crowning himself and riding off to conquer the riverlands, he might be alive today . Be that as it may . You are not Robb, no more than I am Robert . " The harsh words had blown away whatever sympathy Jon might have had for Stannis . " I loved my brother, " he said. " And I mine . Yet they were what they were, and so are we . I am the only true king in Westeros, north or south . And you are Ned Stark ' s bastard . " Stannis studied him with those dark blue eyes . " Tywin Lannister has named Roose Bolton his Warden of the North, to reward him for betraying your brother . The ironmen are fighting amongst themselves since Balon Greyjoy ' s death, yet they still hold Moat Cailin, Deepwood Motte, Torrhen ' s Square, and most of the Stony Shore . Your father ' s lands are bleeding, and I have neither the strength nor the time to stanch the wounds . What is needed is a Lord of Winterfell . A loyal Lord of Winterfell . " He is looking at me, Jon thought, stunned . " Winterfell is no more . Theon Greyjoy put it to the torch . " " Granite does not burn easily, " Stannis said . " The castle can be rebuilt, in time . It ' s not the walls that make a lord, it ' s the man . Your northmen do not know me, have no reason to love me, yet I will need their strength in the battles yet to come . I need a son of Eddard Stark to win them to my banner . " He would make me Lord of Winterfell . The wind was gusting, and Jon felt so light-headed he was half afraid it would blow him off the Wall . " Your Grace, " he said, " you forget . I am a Snow, not a Stark . " " It ' s you who are forgetting, " King Stannis replied. Melisandre put a warm hand on Jon ' s arm . " A king can remove the taint of bastardy with a stroke, Lord Snow . " Lord Snow . Ser Alliser Thorne had named him that, to mock his bastard birth . Many of his brothers had taken to using it as well, some with affection, others to wound . But suddenly it had a different sound to it in Jon ' s ears . It sounded . . . real . " Yes, " he said, hesitantly, " kings have legitimized bastards before, but . . . I am still a brother of the Night ' s Watch . I knelt before a heart tree and swore to hold no lands and father no children . " " Jon . " Melisandre was so close he could feel the warmth of her breath . " R ' hllor is the only true god . A vow sworn to a tree has no more power than one sworn to your shoes . Open your heart and let the light of the Lord come in . Burn these weirwoods, and accept Winterfell as a gift of the Lord of Light . " When Jon had been very young, too young to understand what it meant to be a bastard, he used to dream that one day Winterfell might be his . Later, when he was older, he had been ashamed of those dreams . Winterfell would go to Robb and then his sons, or to Bran or Rickon should Robb die childless . And after them came Sansa and Arya . Even to dream otherwise seemed disloyal, as if he were betraying them in his heart, wishing for their deaths . I never wanted this, he thought as he stood before the blue-eyed king and the red woman . I loved Robb, loved all of them . . . I never wanted any harm to come to any of them, but it did . And now there ' s only me . All he had to do was say the word, and he would be Jon Stark, and nevermore a Snow . All he had to do was pledge this king his fealty, and Winterfell was his . All he had to do . . . . . . was forswear his vows again. And this time it would not be a ruse . To claim his father ' s castle, he must turn against his father ' s gods. King Stannis gazed off north again, his gold cloak streaming from his shoulders . " It may be that I am mistaken in you, Jon Snow . We both know the things that are said of bastards . You may lack your father ' s honor, or your brother ' s skill in arms . But you are the weapon the Lord has given me . I have found you here, as you found the cache of dragonglass beneath the Fist, and I mean to make use of you . Even Azor Ahai did not win his war alone . I killed a thousand wildlings, took another thousand captive, and scattered the rest, but we both know they will return . Melisandre has seen that in her fires . This Tormund Thunderfist is likely re-forming them even now, and planning some new assault . And the more we bleed each other, the weaker we shall all be when the real enemy falls upon us . " Jon had come to that same realization [BOS] As you say, Your Grace . [EOS] He wondered where this king, was going. Whilst your brothers have been struggling to decide who shall lead them, I have been speaking with this Mance Rayder . He ground his teeth . A stubborn man, that one, and prideful . He will leave me no choice but to give him to the flames . But we took other captives as well, other leaders . The one who calls himself the Lord of Bones, some of their clan chiefs, the new Magnar of Thenn . Your brothers will not like it, no more than your father ' s lords, but I mean to allow the wildlings through the Wall . . . those who will swear me their fealty, pledge to keep the king ' s peace and the king ' s laws, and take the Lord of Light as their god . Even the giants, if those great knees of theirs can bend . I will settle them on the Gift, once I have wrested it away from your new Lord Commander . When the cold winds rise, we shall live or die together . It is time we made alliance against our common foe . He looked at Jon . Would you agree? My father dreamed of resettling the Gift, Jon admitted . He and my uncle Benjen used to talk of it . He never thought of settling it with wildlings, though . . . but he never rode with wildlings, either . He did not fool himself; the free folk would make for unruly subjects and dangerous neighbors . Yet when he weighed Ygritte ' s red hair against the cold blue eyes of the wights, the choice was easy . I agree. " Good, " King Stannis said, " for the surest way to seal a new alliance is with a marriage . I mean to wed my Lord of Winterfell to this wildling princess . " Perhaps Jon had ridden with the free folk too long; he could not help but laugh . " Your Grace, " he said, " captive or no, if you think you can just give Val to me, I fear you have a deal to learn about wildling women . Whoever weds her had best be prepared to climb in her tower window and carry her off at swordpoint . . . " " Whoever? " Stannis gave him a measuring look . " Does this mean you will not wed the girl? I warn you, she is part of the price you must pay, if you want your father ' s name and your father ' s castle . This match is necessary, to help assure the loyalty of our new subjects . Are you refusing me, Jon Snow? " Jon said, too quickly . It was Winterfell the king was speaking of, and Winterfell was not to be lightly refused [BOS] No, I mean . . . this has all come very suddenly, Your Grace . Might I beg you for some time to consider? [EOS]  " As you wish . But consider quickly . I am not a patient man, as your black brothers are about to discover . " Stannis put a thin, fleshless hand on Jon ' s shoulder . " Say nothing of what we ' ve discussed here today . To anyone . But when you return, you need only bend your knee, lay your sword at my feet, and pledge yourself to my service, and you shall rise again as Jon Stark, the Lord of Winterfell . " Iron Emmett was a long, lanky young ranger whose endurance, strength, and swordsmanship were the pride of Eastwatch . Jon always came away from their sessions stiff and sore, and woke the next day covered with bruises, which was just the way he wanted it . He would never get any better going up against the likes of Satin and Horse, or even Grenn. Most days he gave as good as he got, Jon liked to think, but not today . He had hardly slept last night, and after an hour of restless tossing he had given up even the attempt, dressed, and walked the top of the Wall till the sun came up, wrestling with Stannis Baratheon ' s offer . The lack of sleep was catching up with him now, and Emmett was hammering him mercilessly across the yard, driving him back on his heels with one long looping cut after another, and slamming him with his shield from time to time for good measure . Jon ' s arm had gone numb from the shock of impact, and the edgeless practice sword seemed to be growing heavier with every passing moment. He was almost ready to lower his blade and call a halt when Emmett feinted low and came in over his shield with a savage forehand slash that caught Jon on the temple . He staggered, his helm and head both ringing from the force of the blow . For half a heartbeat the world beyond his eyeslit was a blur. And then the years were gone, and he was back at Winterfell once more, wearing a quilted leather coat in place of mail and plate . His sword was made of wood, and it was Robb who stood facing him, not Iron Emmett. Every morning they had trained together, since they were big enough to walk; Snow and Stark, spinning and slashing about the wards of Winterfell, shouting and laughing, sometimes crying when there was no one else to see . They were not little boys when they fought, but knights and mighty heroes . I ' m Prince Aemon the Dragonknight, Jon would call out, and Robb would shout back, Well, I ' m Florian the Fool . Or Robb would say, I ' m the Young Dragon, and Jon would reply, I ' m Ser Ryam Redwyne. That morning he called it first . " I ' m Lord of Winterfell! " he cried, as he had a hundred times before . Only this time, this time, Robb had answered, " You can ' t be Lord of Winterfell, you ' re bastard-born . My lady mother says you can ' t ever be the Lord of Winterfell . " I thought I had forgotten that . Jon could taste blood in his mouth, from the blow he ' d taken. In the end Halder and Horse had to pull him away from Iron Emmett, one man on either arm . The ranger sat on the ground dazed, his shield half in splinters, the visor of his helm knocked askew, and his sword six yards away . " Jon, enough, " Halder was shouting, " he ' s down, you disarmed him . Enough! " No . Not enough . Never enough . Jon let his sword drop . " I ' m sorry, " he muttered . " Emmett, are you hurt? " Iron Emmett pulled his battered helm off . Was there some part of yield you could not comprehend, Lord Snow? It was said amiably, though . Emmett was an amiable man, and he loved the song of swords . Warrior defend me, he groaned, now I know how Qhorin Halfhand must have felt. That was too much . Jon wrenched free of his friends and retreated to the armory, alone . His ears were still ringing from the blow Emmett had dealt him . He sat on the bench and buried his head in his hands . Why am I so angry? he asked himself, but it was a stupid question . Lord of Winterfell . I could be the Lord of Winterfell . My father ' s heir. It was not Lord Eddard ' s face he saw floating before him, though; it was Lady Catelyn ' s . With her deep blue eyes and hard cold mouth, she looked a bit like Stannis . Iron, he thought, but brittle . She was looking at him the way she used to look at him at Winterfell, whenever he had bested Robb at swords or sums or most anything . Who are you? that look had always seemed to say . This is not your place . Why are you here? His friends were still out in the practice yard, but Jon was in no fit state to face them . He left the armory by the back, descending a steep flight of stone steps to the wormways, the tunnels that linked the castle ' s keeps and towers below the earth . It was short walk to the bathhouse, where he took a cold plunge to wash the sweat off and soaked in a hot stone tub . The warmth took some of the ache from his muscles and made him think of Winterfell ' s muddy pools, steaming and bubbling in the godswood . Winterfell, he thought . Theon left it burned and broken, but I could restore it . Surely his father would have wanted that, and Robb as well . They would never have wanted the castle left in ruins. You can ' t be the Lord of Winterfell, you ' re bastard-born, he heard Robb say again . And the stone kings were growling at him with granite tongues . You do not belong here . This is not your place . When Jon closed his eyes he saw the heart tree, with its pale limbs, red leaves, and solemn face . The weirwood was the heart of Winterfell, Lord Eddard always said . . . but to save the castle Jon would have to tear that heart up by its ancient roots, and feed it to the red woman ' s hungry fire god . I have no right, he thought . Winterfell belongs to the old gods. The sound of voices echoing off the vaulted ceiling brought him back to Castle Black . " I don ' t know, " a man was saying, in a voice thick with doubts . " Maybe if I knew the man better . . . Lord Stannis didn ' t have much good to say of him, I ' ll tell you that . " " When has Stannis Baratheon ever had much good to say of anyone? " Ser Alliser ' s flinty voice was unmistakable . " If we let Stannis choose our Lord Commander, we become his bannermen in all but name . Tywin Lannister is not like to forget that, and you know it will be Lord Tywin who wins in the end . He ' s already beaten Stannis once, on the Blackwater . " " Lord Tywin favors Slynt, " said Bowen Marsh, in a fretful, anxious voice . " I can show you his letter, Othell . ‘ Our faithful friend and servant, ' he called him . " Jon Snow sat up suddenly, and the three men froze at the sound of the slosh [BOS] My lords, [EOS] he said with cold courtesy. " What are you doing here, bastard? " Thorne asked. Jon climbed from the water, dried, dressed, and left them to conspire [BOS] Bathing . But don ' t let me spoil your plotting . [EOS]  Outside, he found he had no idea where he was going . He walked past the shell of the Lord Commander ' s Tower, where once he ' d saved the Old Bear from a dead man; past the spot where Ygritte had died with that sad smile on her face; past the King ' s Tower where he and Satin and Deaf Dick Follard had waited for the Magnar and his Thenns; past the heaped and charred remains of the great wooden stair . The inner gate was open, so Jon went down the tunnel, through the Wall . He could feel the cold around him, the weight of all the ice above his head . He walked past the place where Donal Noye and Mag the Mighty had fought and died together, through the new outer gate, and back into the pale cold sunlight. Only then did he permit himself to stop, to take a breath, to think . Othell Yarwyck was not a man of strong convictions, except when it came to wood and stone and mortar . The Old Bear had known that . Thorne and Marsh will sway him, Yarwyck will support Lord Janos, and Lord Janos will be chosen Lord Commander . And what does that leave me, if not Winterfell? A wind swirled against the Wall, tugging at his cloak . He could feel the cold coming off the ice the way heat comes off a fire . Jon pulled up his hood and began to walk again . The afternoon was growing old, and the sun was low in the west . A hundred yards away was the camp where King Stannis had confined his wildling captives within a ring of ditches, sharpened stakes, and high wooden fences . To his left were three great firepits, where the victors had burned the bodies of all the free folk to die beneath the Wall, huge pelted giants and little Hornfoot men alike . The killing ground was still a desolation of scorched weeds and hardened pitch, but Mance ' s people had left traces of themselves everywhere; a torn hide that might have been part of a tent, a giant ' s maul, the wheel of a chariot, a broken spear, a pile of mammoth dung . On the edge of the haunted forest, where the tents had been, Jon found an oakwood stump and sat. Ygritte wanted me to be a wildling . Stannis wants me to be the Lord of Winterfell . But what do I want? The sun crept down the sky to dip behind the Wall where it curved through the western hills . Jon watched as that towering expanse of ice took on the reds and pinks of sunset . Would I sooner be hanged for a turncloak by Lord Janos, or forswear my vows, marry Val, and become the Lord of Winterfell? It seemed an easy choice when he thought of it in those terms . . . though if Ygritte had still been alive, it might have been even easier . Val was a stranger to him . She was not hard on the eyes, certainly, and she had been sister to Mance Rayder ' s queen, but still . . . I would need to steal her if I wanted her love, but she might give me children . I might someday hold a son of my own blood in my arms . A son was something Jon Snow had never dared dream of, since he decided to live his life on the Wall . I could name him Robb . Val would want to keep her sister ' s son, but we could foster him at Winterfell, and Gilly ' s boy as well . Sam would never need to tell his lie . We ' d find a place for Gilly too, and Sam could come visit her once a year or so . Mance ' s son and Craster ' s would grow up brothers, as I once did with Robb. He wanted it, Jon knew then . He wanted it as much as he had ever wanted anything . I have always wanted it, he thought, guiltily . May the gods forgive me . It was a hunger inside him, sharp as a dragonglass blade . A hunger . . . he could feel it . It was food he needed, prey, a red deer that stank of fear or a great elk proud and defiant . He needed to kill and fill his belly with fresh meat and hot dark blood . His mouth began to water with the thought. It was a long moment before he understood what was happening . When he did, he bolted to his feet . Ghost? He turned toward the wood, and there he came, padding silently out of the green dusk, the breath coming warm and white from his open jaws . Ghost! he shouted, and the direwolf broke into a run . He was leaner than he had been, but bigger as well, and the only sound he made was the soft crunch of dead leaves beneath his paws . When he reached Jon he leapt, and they wrestled amidst brown grass and long shadows as the stars came out above them . Gods, wolf, where have you been? Jon said when Ghost stopped worrying at his forearm . I thought you ' d died on me, like Robb and Ygritte and all the rest . I ' ve had no sense of you, not since I climbed the Wall, not even in dreams . The direwolf had no answer, but he licked Jon ' s face with a tongue like a wet rasp, and his eyes caught the last light and shone like two great red suns. Red eyes, Jon realized, but not like Melisandre ' s . He had a weirwood ' s eyes . Red eyes, red mouth, white fur . Blood and bone, like a heart tree . He belongs to the old gods, this one . And he alone of all the direwolves was white . Six pups they ' d found in the late summer snows, him and Robb; five that were grey and black and brown, for the five Starks, and one white, as white as Snow. He had his answer then. Beneath the Wall, the queen ' s men were kindling their nightfire . He saw Melisandre emerge from the tunnel with the king beside her, to lead the prayers she believed would keep the dark away . Jon told the wolf [BOS] Come, Ghost, With me . You ' re hungry, I know . I could feel it . [EOS] They ran together for the gate, circling wide around the nightfire, where reaching flames clawed at the black belly of the night. The king ' s men were much in evidence in the yards of Castle Black . They stopped as Jon went by, and gaped at him . None of them had ever seen a direwolf before, he realized, and Ghost was twice as large as the common wolves that prowled their southron greenwoods . As he walked toward the armory, Jon chanced to look up and saw Val standing in her tower window . I ' m sorry, he thought . I ' m not the man to steal you out of there. In the practice yard he came upon a dozen king ' s men with torches and long spears in their hands . Their sergeant looked at Ghost and scowled, and a couple of his men lowered their spears until the knight who led them said, " Move aside and let them pass . " To Jon he said, " You ' re late for your supper . " Jon replied, and he did [BOS] Then get out of my way, ser, [EOS]  He could hear the noise even before he reached the bottom of the steps; raised voices, curses, someone pounding on a table . Jon stepped into the vault all but unnoticed . His brothers crowded the benches and the tables, but more were standing and shouting than were sitting, and no one was eating . There was no food . What ' s happening here? Lord Janos Slynt was bellowing about turncloaks and treason, Iron Emmett stood on a table with a naked sword in his fist, Three-Finger Hobb was cursing a ranger from the Shadow Tower . . . some Eastwatch man slammed his fist onto the table again and again, demanding quiet, but all that did was add to the din echoing off the vaulted ceiling. Pyp was the first to see Jon . He grinned at the sight of Ghost, put two fingers in his mouth, and whistled as only a mummer ' s boy could whistle . The shrill sound cut through the clamor like a sword . As Jon walked toward the tables, more of the brothers took note, and fell quiet . A hush spread across the cellar, until the only sounds were Jon ' s heels clicking on the stone floor, and the soft crackle of the logs in the hearth. Ser Alliser Thorne shattered the silence . " The turncloak graces us with his presence at last . " Lord Janos was red-faced and quivering . " The beast, " he gasped . " Look! The beast that tore the life from Halfhand . A warg walks among us, brothers . A WARG! This . . . this creature is not fit to lead us! This beastling is not fit to live! " Ghost bared his teeth, but Jon put a hand on his head . " My lord, " he said, " will you tell me what ' s happened here? " Maester Aemon answered, from the far end of the hall . " Your name has been put forth as Lord Commander, Jon . " That was so absurd Jon had to smile . " By who? " he said, looking for his friends . This had to be one of Pyp ' s japes, surely . But Pyp shrugged at him, and Grenn shook his head . It was Dolorous Edd Tollett who stood . " By me . Aye, it ' s a terrible cruel thing to do to a friend, but better you than me . " Lord Janos started sputtering again . " This, this is an outrage . We ought to hang this boy . Yes! Hang him, I say, hang him for a turncloak and a warg, along with his friend Mance Rayder . Lord Commander? I will not have it, I will not suffer it! " Cotter Pyke stood up . " You won ' t suffer it? Might be you had those gold cloaks trained to lick your bloody arse, but you ' re wearing a black cloak now . " " Any brother may offer any name for our consideration, so long as the man has said his vows, " Ser Denys Mallister said . " Tollett is well within his rights, my lord . " A dozen men started to talk at once, each trying to drown out the others, and before long half the hall was shouting once more . This time it was Ser Alliser Thorne who leapt up on the table, and raised his hands for quiet . " Brothers! " he cried, " this gains us naught . I say we vote . This king who has taken the King ' s Tower has posted men at all the doors to see that we do not eat nor leave till we have made a choice . So be it! We will choose, and choose again, all night if need be, until we have our lord . . . but before we cast our tokens, I believe our First Builder has something to say to us . " Othell Yarwyck stood up slowly, frowning . The big builder rubbed his long lantern jaw and said, " Well, I ' m pulling my name out . If you wanted me, you had ten chances to choose me, and you didn ' t . Not enough of you, anyway . I was going to say that those who were casting a token for me ought to choose Lord Janos . . . " Ser Alliser nodded . " Lord Slynt is the best possible— " " I wasn ' t done, Alliser, " Yarwyck complained . " Lord Slynt commanded the City Watch in King ' s Landing, we all know, and he was Lord of Harrenhal . . . " " He ' s never seen Harrenhal, " Cotter Pyke shouted out. Well, that ' s so, said Yarwyck . Anyway, now that I ' m standing here, I don ' t recall why I thought Slynt would be such a good choice . That would be sort of kicking King Stannis in the mouth, and I don ' t see how that serves us . Might be Snow would be better . He ' s been longer on the Wall, he ' s Ben Stark ' s nephew, and he served the Old Bear as squire . Yarwyck shrugged . Pick who you want, just so it ' s not me . He sat down. Janos Slynt had turned from red to purple, Jon saw, but Ser Alliser Thorne had gone pale . The Eastwatch man was pounding his fist on the table again, but now he was shouting for the kettle . Some of his friends took up the cry . " Kettle! " they roared, as one . " Kettle, kettle, KETTLE! " The kettle was in the corner by the hearth, a big black potbellied thing with two huge handles and a heavy lid . Maester Aemon said a word to Sam and Clydas and they went and grabbed the handles and dragged the kettle over to the table . A few of the brothers were already queueing up by the token barrels as Clydas took the lid off and almost dropped it on his foot . With a raucous scream and a clap of wings, a huge raven burst out of the kettle . It flapped upward, seeking the rafters perhaps, or a window to make its escape, but there were no rafters in the vault, nor windows either . The raven was trapped . Cawing loudly, it circled the hall, once, twice, three times . And Jon heard Samwell Tarly shout, " I know that bird! That ' s Lord Mormont ' s raven! " The raven landed on the table nearest Jon . Snow, it cawed . It was an old bird, dirty and bedraggled . Snow, it said again, Snow, snow, snow . It walked to the end of the table, spread its wings again, and flew to Jon ' s shoulder. Lord Janos Slynt sat down so heavily he made a thump, but Ser Alliser filled the vault with mocking laughter . " Ser Piggy thinks we ' re all fools, brothers, " he said . " He ' s taught the bird this little trick . They all say snow, go up to the rookery and hear for yourselves . Mormont ' s bird had more words than that . " The raven cocked its head and looked at Jon . " Corn? " it said hopefully . When it got neither corn nor answer, it quorked and muttered, " Kettle? Kettle? Kettle? " The rest was arrowheads, a torrent of arrowheads, a flood of arrowheads, arrowheads enough to drown the last few stones and shells, and all the copper pennies too. When the count was done, Jon found himself surrounded . Some clapped him on the back, whilst others bent the knee to him as if he were a lord in truth . Satin, Owen the Oaf, Halder, Toad, Spare Boot, Giant, Mully, Ulmer of the Kingswood, Sweet Donnel Hill, and half a hundred more pressed around him . Dywen clacked his wooden teeth and said, " Gods be good, our Lord Commander ' s still in swaddling clothes . " Iron Emmett said, " I hope this don ' t mean I can ' t beat the bloody piss out of you next time we train, my lord . " Three-Finger Hobb wanted to know if he ' d still be eating with the men, or if he ' d want his meals sent up to his solar . Even Bowen Marsh came up to say he would be glad to continue as Lord Steward if that was Lord Snow ' s wish. " Lord Snow, " said Cotter Pyke, " if you muck this up, I ' m going to rip your liver out and eat it raw with onions . " Ser Denys Mallister was more courteous . It was a hard thing young Samwell asked of me, the old knight confessed . When Lord Qorgyle was chosen, I told myself, ‘ No matter, he has been longer on the Wall than you have, your time will come . ' When it was Lord Mormont, I thought, ‘ He is strong and fierce, but he is old, your time may yet come . ' But you are half a boy, Lord Snow, and now I must return to the Shadow Tower knowing that my time will never come . He smiled a tired smile . Do not make me die regretful . Your uncle was a great man . Your lord father and his father as well . I shall expect full as much of you. " Aye, " said Cotter Pyke . " And you can start by telling those king ' s men that it ' s done, and we want our bloody supper . " " Supper, " screamed the raven . " Supper, supper . " The king ' s men cleared the door when they told them of the choosing, and Three-Finger Hobb and half a dozen helpers went trotting off to the kitchen to fetch the food . Jon did not wait to eat . He walked across the castle, wondering if he were dreaming, with the raven on his shoulder and Ghost at his heels . Pyp, Grenn, and Sam trailed after him, chattering, but he hardly heard a word until Grenn whispered, Sam did it, and Pyp said, Sam did it! Pyp had brought a wineskin with him, and he took a long drink and chanted, Sam, Sam, Sam the wizard, Sam the wonder, Sam Sam the marvel man, he did it . But when did you hide the raven in the kettle, Sam, and how in seven hells could you be certain it would fly to Jon? It would have mucked up everything if the bird had decided to perch on Janos Slynt ' s fat head. " I had nothing to do with the bird, " Sam insisted . " When it flew out of the kettle I almost wet myself . " Jon laughed, half amazed that he still remembered how [BOS] You ' re all a bunch of mad fools, do you know that? [EOS]  " Us? " said Pyp . " You call us fools? We ' re not the ones who got chosen as the nine-hundredth-and-ninety-eighth Lord Commander of the Night ' s Watch . You best have some wine, Lord Jon . I think you ' re going to need a lot of wine . " So Jon Snow took the wineskin from his hand and had a swallow . But only one . The Wall was his, the night was dark, and he had a king to face. The white wolf raced through a black wood, beneath a pale cliff as tall as the sky . The moon ran with him, slipping through a tangle of bare branches overhead, across the starry sky. " Snow, " the moon murmured . The wolf made no answer . Snow crunched beneath his paws . The wind sighed through the trees. Far off, he could hear his packmates calling to him, like to like . They were hunting too . A wild rain lashed down upon his black brother as he tore at the flesh of an enormous goat, washing the blood from his side where the goat ' s long horn had raked him . In another place, his little sister lifted her head to sing to the moon, and a hundred small grey cousins broke off their hunt to sing with her . The hills were warmer where they were, and full of food . Many a night his sister ' s pack gorged on the flesh of sheep and cows and horses, the prey of men, and sometimes even on the flesh of man himself. " Snow, " the moon called down again, cackling . The white wolf padded along the man trail beneath the icy cliff . The taste of blood was on his tongue, and his ears rang to the song of the hundred cousins . Once they had been six, five whimpering blind in the snow beside their dead mother, sucking cool milk from her hard dead nipples whilst he crawled off alone . Four remained … and one the white wolf could no longer sense. " Snow, " the moon insisted. The white wolf ran from it, racing toward the cave of night where the sun had hidden, his breath frosting in the air . On starless nights the great cliff was as black as stone, a darkness towering high above the wide world, but when the moon came out it shimmered pale and icy as a frozen stream . The wolf ' s pelt was thick and shaggy, but when the wind blew along the ice no fur could keep the chill out . On the other side the wind was colder still, the wolf sensed . That was where his brother was, the grey brother who smelled of summer. Snow . An icicle tumbled from a branch . The white wolf turned and bared his teeth . Snow! His fur rose bristling, as the woods dissolved around him . Snow, snow, snow! He heard the beat of wings . Through the gloom a raven flew. It landed on Jon Snow ' s chest with a thump and a scrabbling of claws . " SNOW! " it screamed into his face. I hear you . The room was dim, his pallet hard . Grey light leaked through the shutters, promising another bleak cold day . Is this how you woke Mormont? Get your feathers out of my face . Jon wriggled an arm out from under his blankets to shoo the raven off . It was a big bird, old and bold and scruffy, utterly without fear . Snow, it cried, flapping to his bedpost . Snow, snow . Jon filled his fist with a pillow and let fly, but the bird took to the air . The pillow struck the wall and burst, scattering stuffing everywhere just as Dolorous Edd Tollett poked his head through the door . Beg pardon, he said, ignoring the flurry of feathers, shall I fetch m ' lord some breakfast? " Corn, " cried the raven . " Corn, corn . " Jon suggested [BOS] Roast raven, And half a pint of ale . [EOS] Having a steward fetch and serve for him still felt strange; not long ago, it would have been him fetching breakfast for Lord Commander Mormont. " Three corns and one roast raven, " said Dolorous Edd . " Very good, m ' lord, only Hobb ' s made boiled eggs, black sausage, and apples stewed with prunes . The apples stewed with prunes are excellent, except for the prunes . I won ' t eat prunes myself . Well, there was one time when Hobb chopped them up with chestnuts and carrots and hid them in a hen . Never trust a cook, my lord . They ' ll prune you when you least expect it . " " Later . " Breakfast could wait; Stannis could not . " Any trouble from the stockades last night? " " Not since you put guards on the guards, m ' lord . " " Good . " A thousand wildlings had been penned up beyond the Wall, the captives Stannis Baratheon had taken when his knights had smashed Mance Rayder ' s patchwork host . Many of the prisoners were women, and some of the guards had been sneaking them out to warm their beds . King ' s men, queen ' s men, it did not seem to matter; a few black brothers had tried the same thing . Men were men, and these were the only women for a thousand leagues. " Two more wildlings turned up to surrender, " Edd went on . " A mother with a girl clinging to her skirts . She had a boy babe too, all swaddled up in fur, but he was dead . " " Dead, " said the raven . It was one of the bird ' s favorite words . " Dead, dead, dead . " They had free folk drifting in most every night, starved half-frozen creatures who had run from the battle beneath the Wall only to crawl back when they realized there was no safe place to run to . Jon asked . Stannis Baratheon had smashed Mance Rayder ' s host and made the King-Beyond-the-Wall his captive … but the wildlings were still out there, the Weeper and Tormund Giantsbane and thousands more [BOS] Was the mother questioned? [EOS]  " Aye, m ' lord, " said Edd, " but all she knows is that she ran off during the battle and hid in the woods after . We filled her full of porridge, sent her to the pens, and burned the babe . " Burning dead children had ceased to trouble Jon Snow; live ones were another matter . Two kings to wake the dragon . The father first and then the son, so both die kings . The words had been murmured by one of the queen ' s men as Maester Aemon had cleaned his wounds . Jon had tried to dismiss them as his fever talking . Aemon had demurred . " There is power in a king ' s blood, " the old maester had warned, " and better men than Stannis have done worse things than this . " The king can be harsh and unforgiving, aye, but a babe still on the breast? Only a monster would give a living child to the flames. Jon pissed in darkness, filling his chamber pot as the Old Bear ' s raven muttered complaints . The wolf dreams had been growing stronger, and he found himself remembering them even when awake . Ghost knows that Grey Wind is dead . Robb had died at the Twins, betrayed by men he ' d believed his friends, and his wolf had perished with him . Bran and Rickon had been murdered too, beheaded at the behest of Theon Greyjoy, who had once been their lord father ' s ward … but if dreams did not lie, their direwolves had escaped . At Queenscrown, one had come out of the darkness to save Jon ' s life . Summer, it had to be . His fur was grey, and Shaggydog is black . He wondered if some part of his dead brothers lived on inside their wolves. He filled his basin from the flagon of water beside his bed, washed his face and hands, donned a clean set of black woolens, laced up a black leather jerkin, and pulled on a pair of well-worn boots . Mormont ' s raven watched with shrewd black eyes, then fluttered to the window . " Do you take me for your thrall? " When Jon folded back the window with its thick diamond-shaped panes of yellow glass, the chill of the morning hit him in the face . He took a breath to clear away the cobwebs of the night as the raven flapped away . That bird is too clever by half . It had been the Old Bear ' s companion for long years, but that had not stopped it from eating Mormont ' s face once he died. Outside his bedchamber a flight of steps descended to a larger room furnished with a scarred pinewood table and a dozen oak-and-leather chairs . With Stannis in the King ' s Tower and the Lord Commander ' s Tower burned to a shell, Jon had established himself in Donal Noye ' s modest rooms behind the armory . In time, no doubt, he would need larger quarters, but for the moment these would serve whilst he accustomed himself to command. The grant that the king had presented him for signature was on the table beneath a silver drinking cup that had once been Donal Noye ' s . The one-armed smith had left few personal effects: the cup, six pennies and a copper star, a niello brooch with a broken clasp, a musty brocade doublet that bore the stag of Storm ' s End . His treasures were his tools, and the swords and knives he made . His life was at the forge . Jon moved the cup aside and read the parchment once again . If I put my seal to this, I will forever be remembered as the lord commander who gave away the Wall, he thought, but if I should refuse … Stannis Baratheon was proving to be a prickly guest, and a restless one . He had ridden down the kingsroad almost as far as Queenscrown, prowled through the empty hovels of Mole ' s Town, inspected the ruined forts at Queensgate and Oakenshield . Each night he walked atop the Wall with Lady Melisandre, and during the days he visited the stockades, picking captives out for the red woman to question . He does not like to be balked . This would not be a pleasant morning, Jon feared. From the armory came a clatter of shields and swords, as the latest lot of boys and raw recruits armed themselves . He could hear the voice of Iron Emmett telling them to be quick about it . Cotter Pyke had not been pleased to lose him, but the young ranger had a gift for training men . He loves to fight, and he ' ll teach his boys to love it too . Or so he hoped. Jon ' s cloak hung on a peg by the door, his sword belt on another . He donned them both and made his way to the armory . The rug where Ghost slept was empty, he saw . Two guardsmen stood inside the doors, clad in black cloaks and iron halfhelms, spears in their hands [BOS] Will m ' lord be wanting a tail? [EOS] asked Garse. Jon hated having guards trailing after him everywhere he went . It made him feel like a mother duck leading a procession of ducklings [BOS] I think I can find the King ' s Tower by myself . [EOS]  Iron Emmett ' s lads were well at it in the yard, blunted swords slamming into shields and ringing against one another . Jon stopped to watch a moment as Horse pressed Hop-Robin back toward the well . Horse had the makings of a good fighter, he decided . He was strong and getting stronger, and his instincts were sound . Hop-Robin was another tale . His clubfoot was bad enough, but he was afraid of getting hit as well . Perhaps we can make a steward of him . The fight ended abruptly, with Hop-Robin on the ground. Jon said to Horse, [BOS] Well fought, but you drop your shield too low when pressing an attack . You will want to correct that, or it is like to get you killed . [EOS]  " Yes, m ' lord . I ' ll keep it higher next time . " Horse pulled Hop-Robin to his feet, and the smaller boy made a clumsy bow. A few of Stannis ' s knights were sparring on the far side of the yard . King ' s men in one corner and queen ' s men in another, Jon did not fail to note, but only a few . It ' s too cold for most of them . As he strode past them, a booming voice called after him . " BOY! YOU THERE! BOY! " Boy was not the worst of the things that Jon Snow had been called since being chosen lord commander . He ignored it. " Snow, " the voice insisted, " Lord Commander . " This time he stopped . " Ser? " The knight overtopped him by six inches . " A man who bears Valyrian steel should use it for more than scratching his arse . " Jon had seen this one about the castle—a knight of great renown, to hear him tell it . During the battle beneath the Wall, Ser Godry Farring had slain a fleeing giant, pounding after him on horseback and driving a lance through his back, then dismounting to hack off the creature ' s pitiful small head . The queen ' s men had taken to calling him Godry the Giantslayer. Jon remembered Ygritte, crying . I am the last of the giants [BOS] I use Longclaw when I must, ser . [EOS]  " How well, though? " Ser Godry drew his own blade . " Show us . I promise not to hurt you, lad . " How kind of you . " Some other time, ser . I fear that I have other duties just now . " " You fear . I see that . " Ser Godry grinned at his friends . " He fears, " he repeated, for the slow ones. Jon showed them his back [BOS] You will excuse me . [EOS]  Castle Black seemed a bleak and forlorn place in the pale dawn light . My command, Jon Snow reflected ruefully, as much a ruin as it is a stronghold . The Lord Commander ' s Tower was a shell, the Common Hall a pile of blackened timbers, and Hardin ' s Tower looked as if the next gust of wind would knock it over … though it had looked that way for years . Behind them rose the Wall: immense, forbidding, frigid, acrawl with builders pushing up a new switchback stair to join the remnants of the old . They worked from dawn to dusk . Without the stair, there was no way to reach the top of the Wall save by winch . That would not serve if the wildlings should attack again. Above the King ' s Tower the great golden battle standard of House Baratheon cracked like a whip from the roof where Jon Snow had prowled with bow in hand not long ago, slaying Thenns and free folk beside Satin and Deaf Dick Follard . Two queen ' s men stood shivering on the steps, their hands tucked up into their armpits and their spears leaning against the door . Jon told them [BOS] Those cloth gloves will never serve, See Bowen Marsh on the morrow, and he ' ll give you each a pair of leather gloves lined with fur . [EOS]  " We will, m ' lord, and thank you, " said the older guard. " That ' s if our bloody hands aren ' t froze off, " the younger added, his breath a pale mist . " I used to think that it got cold up in the Dornish Marches . What did I know? " Nothing, thought Jon Snow, the same as me. Halfway up the winding steps, he came upon Samwell Tarly, headed down . Jon asked him [BOS] Are you coming from the king? [EOS]  " Maester Aemon sent me with a letter . " " I see . " Some lords trusted their maesters to read their letters and convey the contents, but Stannis insisted on breaking the seals himself . " How did Stannis take it? " " Not happily, by his face . " Sam dropped his voice to a whisper . " I am not supposed to speak of it . " Jon wondered which of his father ' s bannermen had refused King Stannis homage this time . He was quick enough to spread the word when Karhold declared for him [BOS] Then don ' t. How are you and your longbow getting on? [EOS]  " I found a good book about archery . " Sam frowned . " Doing it is harder than reading about it, though . I get blisters . " " Keep at it . We may need your bow on the Wall if the Others turn up some dark night . " " Oh, I hope not . " More guards stood outside the king ' s solar . " No arms are allowed in His Grace ' s presence, my lord, " their serjeant said . " I ' ll need that sword . Your knives as well . " It would do no good to protest, Jon knew . He handed them his weaponry. Within the solar the air was warm . Lady Melisandre was seated near the fire, her ruby glimmering against the pale skin of her throat . Ygritte had been kissed by fire; the red priestess was fire, and her hair was blood and flame . Stannis stood behind the rough-hewn table where the Old Bear had once been wont to sit and take his meals . Covering the table was a large map of the north, painted on a ragged piece of hide . A tallow candle weighed down one end of it, a steel gauntlet the other. The king wore lambswool breeches and a quilted doublet, yet somehow he looked as stiff and uncomfortable as if he had been clad in plate and mail . His skin was pale leather, his beard cropped so short that it might have been painted on . A fringe about his temples was all that remained of his black hair . In his hand was a parchment with a broken seal of dark green wax. Jon took a knee . The king frowned at him, and rattled the parchment angrily [BOS] Rise . Tell me, who is Lyanna Mormont? [EOS]  " One of Lady Maege ' s daughters, Sire . The youngest . She was named for my lord father ' s sister . " " To curry your lord father ' s favor, I don ' t doubt . I know how that game is played . How old is this wretched girl child? " Jon had to think a moment [BOS] Ten . Or near enough to make no matter . Might I know how she has offended Your Grace? [EOS]  Stannis read from the letter . " Bear Island knows no king but the King in the North, whose name is STARK . A girl of ten, you say, and she presumes to scold her lawful king . " His close-cropped beard lay like a shadow over his hollow cheeks . " See that you keep these tidings to yourself, Lord Snow . Karhold is with me, that is all the men need know . I will not have your brothers trading tales of how this child spat on me . " " As you command, Sire . " Maege Mormont had ridden south with Robb, Jon knew . Her eldest daughter had joined the Young Wolf ' s host as well . Even if both of them had died, however, Lady Maege had other daughters, some with children of their own . Had they gone with Robb as well? Surely Lady Maege would have left at least one of the older girls behind as castellan . He did not understand why Lyanna should be writing Stannis, and could not help but wonder if the girl ' s answer might have been different if the letter had been sealed with a direwolf instead of a crowned stag, and signed by Jon Stark, Lord of Winterfell . It is too late for such misgivings . You made your choice. " Two score ravens were sent out, " the king complained, " yet we get no response but silence and defiance . Homage is the duty every leal subject owes his king . Yet your father ' s bannermen all turn their back on me, save the Karstarks . Is Arnolf Karstark the only man of honor in the north? " Arnolf Karstark was the late Lord Rickard ' s uncle . He had been made the castellan of Karhold when his nephew and his sons went south with Robb, and he had been the first to respond to King Stannis ' s call for homage, with a raven declaring his allegiance . The Karstarks have no other choice, Jon might have said . Rickard Karstark had betrayed the direwolf and spilled the blood of lions . The stag was Karhold ' s only hope . " In times as confused as these, even men of honor must wonder where their duty lies . Your Grace is not the only king in the realm demanding homage . " Lady Melisandre stirred . " Tell me, Lord Snow … where were these other kings when the wild people stormed your Wall? " Jon replied [BOS] A thousand leagues away and deaf to our need, I have not forgotten that, my lady . Nor will I . But my father ' s bannermen have wives and children to protect, and smallfolk who will die should they choose wrongly . His Grace asks much of them . Give them time, and you will have your answers . [EOS]  " Answers such as this? " Stannis crushed Lyanna ' s letter in his fist. " Even in the north men fear the wroth of Tywin Lannister . Boltons make bad enemies as well . It is not happenstance that put a flayed man on their banners . They north rode with Robb, bled with him, died for him . They have supped on grief and death, and now you come to offer them another serving . Do you blame them if they hang back? Forgive me, Your Grace, but some will look at you and see only another doomed pretender . " " If His Grace is doomed, your realm is doomed as well, " said Lady Melisandre . " Remember that, Lord Snow . It is the one true king of Westeros who stands before you . " Jon kept his face a mask [BOS] As you say, my lady . [EOS]  Stannis snorted . " You spend your words as if every one were a golden dragon . I wonder, how much gold do you have laid by? " " Gold? " Are those the dragons the red woman means to wake? Dragons made of gold? " Such taxes as we collect are paid in kind, Your Grace . The Watch is rich in turnips but poor in coin . " " Turnips are not like to appease Salladhor Saan . I require gold or silver . " " For that, you need White Harbor . The city cannot compare to Oldtown or King ' s Landing, but it is still a thriving port . Lord Manderly is the richest of my lord father ' s bannermen . " " Lord Too-Fat-to-Sit-a-Horse . " The letter that Lord Wyman Manderly had sent back from White Harbor had spoken of his age and infirmity, and little more . Stannis had commanded Jon not to speak of that one either. " Perhaps his lordship would fancy a wildling wife, " said Lady Melisandre . " Is this fat man married, Lord Snow? " " His lady wife is long dead . Lord Wyman has two grown sons, and grandchildren by the elder . And he is too fat to sit a horse, thirty stone at least . Val would never have him . " " Just once you might try to give me an answer that would please me, Lord Snow, " the king grumbled. " I would hope the truth would please you, Sire . Your men call Val a princess, but to the free folk she is only the sister of their king ' s dead wife . If you force her to marry a man she does not want, she is like to slit his throat on their wedding night . Even if she accepts her husband, that does not mean the wildlings will follow him, or you . The only man who can bind them to your cause is Mance Rayder . " " I know that, " Stannis said, unhappily . " I have spent hours speaking with the man . He knows much and more of our true enemy, and there is cunning in him, I ' ll grant you . Even if he were to renounce his kingship, though, the man remains an oathbreaker . Suffer one deserter to live, and you encourage others to desert . No . Laws should be made of iron, not of pudding . Mance Rayder ' s life is forfeit by every law of the Seven Kingdoms . " " The law ends at the Wall, Your Grace . You could make good use of Mance . " " I mean to . I ' ll burn him, and the north will see how I deal with turncloaks and traitors . I have other men to lead the wildlings . And I have Rayder ' s son, do not forget . Once the father dies, his whelp will be the King-Beyond-the-Wall . " " Your Grace is mistaken . " You know nothing, Jon Snow, Ygritte used to say, but he had learned . " The babe is no more a prince than Val is a princess . You do not become King-Beyond-the-Wall because your father was . " " Good, " said Stannis, " for I will suffer no other kings in Westeros . Have you signed the grant? " " No, Your Grace . " And now it comes . Jon closed his burned fingers and opened them again . " You ask too much . " " Ask? I asked you to be Lord of Winterfell and Warden of the North . I require these castles . " " We have ceded you the Nightfort . " " Rats and ruins . It is a niggard ' s gift that costs the giver nothing . Your own man Yarwyck says it will be half a year before the castle can be made fit for habitation . " " The other forts are no better . " " I know that . It makes no matter . They are all we have . There are nineteen forts along the Wall, and you have men in only three of them . I mean to have every one of them garrisoned again before the year is out . " " I have no quarrel with that, Sire, but it is being said that you also mean to grant these castles to your knights and lords, to hold as their own seats as vassals to Your Grace . " " Kings are expected to be open-handed to their followers . Did Lord Eddard teach his bastard nothing? Many of my knights and lords abandoned rich lands and stout castles in the south . Should their loyalty go unrewarded? " " If Your Grace wishes to lose all of my lord father ' s bannermen, there is no more certain way than by giving northern halls to southron lords . " " How can I lose men I do not have? I had hoped to bestow Winterfell on a northman, you may recall . A son of Eddard Stark . He threw my offer in my face . " Stannis Baratheon with a grievance was like a mastiff with a bone; he gnawed it down to splinters. " By right Winterfell should go to my sister Sansa . " " Lady Lannister, you mean? Are you so eager to see the Imp perched on your father ' s seat? I promise you, that will not happen whilst I live, Lord Snow . " Jon knew better than to press the point [BOS] Sire, some claim that you mean to grant lands and castles to Rattleshirt and the Magnar of Thenn . [EOS]  " Who told you that? " The talk was all over Castle Black . " If you must know, I had the tale from Gilly . " " Who is Gilly? " " The wet nurse, " said Lady Melisandre . " Your Grace gave her freedom of the castle . " " Not for running tales . She ' s wanted for her teats, not for her tongue . I ' ll have more milk from her, and fewer messages . " Jon agreed [BOS] Castle Black needs no useless mouths, I am sending Gilly south on the next ship out of Eastwatch . [EOS]  Melisandre touched the ruby at her neck . " Gilly is giving suck to Dalla ' s son as well as her own . It seems cruel of you to part our little prince from his milk brother, my lord . " Careful now, careful . " Mother ' s milk is all they share . Gilly ' s son is larger and more robust . He kicks the prince and pinches him, and shoves him from the breast . Craster was his father, a cruel man and greedy, and blood tells . " The king was confused . " I thought the wet nurse was this man Craster ' s daughter? " " Wife and daughter both, Your Grace . Craster married all his daughters . Gilly ' s boy was the fruit of their union . " " Her own father got this child on her? " Stannis sounded shocked . " We are well rid of her, then . I will not suffer such abominations here . This is not King ' s Landing . " " I can find another wet nurse . If there ' s none amongst the wildlings, I will send to the mountain clans . Until such time, goat ' s milk should suffice for the boy, if it please Your Grace . " " Poor fare for a prince … but better than whore ' s milk, aye . " Stannis drummed his fingers on the map . " If we may return to the matter of these forts … " " Your Grace, " said Jon, with chilly courtesy, " I have housed your men and fed them, at dire cost to our winter stores . I have clothed them so they would not freeze . " Stannis was not appeased . " Aye, you ' ve shared your salt pork and porridge, and you ' ve thrown us some black rags to keep us warm . Rags the wildlings would have taken off your corpses if I had not come north . " Jon ignored that [BOS] I have given you fodder for your horses, and once the stair is done I will lend you builders to restore the Nightfort . I have even agreed to allow you to settle wildlings on the Gift, which was given to the Night ' s Watch in perpetuity . [EOS]  " You offer me empty lands and desolations, yet deny me the castles I require to reward my lords and bannermen . " " The Night ' s Watch built those castles … " " And the Night ' s Watch abandoned them . " Jon finished stubbornly, [BOS] … to defend the Wall, not as seats for southron lords . The stones of those forts are mortared with the blood and bones of my brothers, long dead . I cannot give them to you . [EOS]  " Cannot or will not? " The cords in the king ' s neck stood out sharp as swords . " I offered you a name . " " I have a name, Your Grace . " " Snow . Was ever a name more ill-omened? " Stannis touched his sword hilt . " Just who do you imagine that you are? " " The watcher on the walls . The sword in the darkness . " Don ' t prate your words at me . Stannis drew the blade he called Lightbringer . Here is your sword in the darkness . Light rippled up and down the blade, now red, now yellow, now orange, painting the king ' s face in harsh, bright hues . Even a green boy should be able to see that . Are you blind? " No, Sire . I agree these castles must be garrisoned— " " The boy commander agrees . How fortunate . " " —by the Night ' s Watch . " " You do not have the men . " " Then give me men, Sire . I will provide officers for each of the abandoned forts, seasoned commanders who know the Wall and the lands beyond, and how best to survive the coming winter . In return for all we ' ve given you, grant me the men to fill out the garrisons . Men-at-arms, crossbowmen, raw boys . I will even take your wounded and infirm . " Stannis stared at him incredulously, then gave a bark of laughter . " You are bold enough, Snow, I grant you that, but you ' re mad if you think my men will take the black . " " They can wear any color cloak they choose, so long as they obey my officers as they would your own . " The king was unmoved . " I have knights and lords in my service, scions of noble Houses old in honor . They cannot be expected to serve under poachers, peasants, and murderers . " Or bastards, Sire? " Your own Hand is a smuggler . " " Was a smuggler . I shortened his fingers for that . They tell me that you are the nine-hundred-ninety-eighth man to command the Night ' s Watch, Lord Snow . What do you think the nine-hundred-ninety-ninth might say about these castles? The sight of your head on a spike might inspire him to be more helpful . " The king laid his bright blade down on the map, along the Wall, its steel shimmering like sunlight on water . " You are only lord commander by my sufferance . You would do well to remember that . " " I am lord commander because my brothers chose me . " There were mornings when Jon Snow did not quite believe it himself, when he woke up thinking surely this was some mad dream . It ' s like putting on new clothes, Sam had told him . The fit feels strange at first, but once you ' ve worn them for a while you get to feeling comfortable. " Alliser Thorne complains about the manner of your choosing, and I cannot say he does not have a grievance . " The map lay between them like a battleground, drenched by the colors of the glowing sword . " The count was done by a blind man with your fat friend by his elbow . And Slynt names you a turncloak . " And who would know one better than Slynt? " A turncloak would tell you what you wished to hear and betray you later . Your Grace knows that I was fairly chosen . My father always said you were a just man . " Just but harsh had been Lord Eddard ' s exact words, but Jon did not think it would be wise to share that. " Lord Eddard was no friend to me, but he was not without some sense . He would have given me these castles . " Never . " I cannot speak to what my father might have done . I took an oath, Your Grace . The Wall is mine . " " For now . We will see how well you hold it . " Stannis pointed at him . " Keep your ruins, as they mean so much to you . I promise you, though, if any remain empty when the year is out, I will take them with your leave or without it . And if even one should fall to the foe, your head will soon follow . Now get out . " Lady Melisandre rose from her place near the hearth . " With your leave, Sire, I will show Lord Snow back to his chambers . " " Why? He knows the way . " Stannis waved them both away . " Do what you will . Devan, food . Boiled eggs and lemon water . " After the warmth of the king ' s solar, the turnpike stair felt bone-chillingly cold . " Wind ' s rising, m ' lady, " the serjeant warned Melisandre as he handed Jon back his weapons . " You might want a warmer cloak . " " I have my faith to warm me . " The red woman walked beside Jon down the steps . " His Grace is growing fond of you . " " I can tell . He only threatened to behead me twice . " Melisandre laughed . " It is his silences you should fear, not his words . " As they stepped out into the yard, the wind filled Jon ' s cloak and sent it flapping against her . The red priestess brushed the black wool aside and slipped her arm through his . " It may be that you are not wrong about the wildling king . I shall pray for the Lord of Light to send me guidance . When I gaze into the flames, I can see through stone and earth, and find the truth within men ' s souls . I can speak to kings long dead and children not yet born, and watch the years and seasons flicker past, until the end of days . " " Are your fires never wrong? " " Never … though we priests are mortal and sometimes err, mistaking this must come for this may come . " Jon could feel her heat, even through his wool and boiled leather . The sight of them arm in arm was drawing curious looks . They will be whispering in the barracks tonight [BOS] If you can truly see the morrow in your flames, tell me when and where the next wildling attack will come . [EOS] He slipped his arm free. " R ' hllor sends us what visions he will, but I shall seek for this man Tormund in the flames . " Melisandre ' s red lips curled into a smile . " I have seen you in my fires, Jon Snow . " " Is that a threat, my lady? Do you mean to burn me too? " " You mistake my meaning . " She gave him a searching look . " I fear that I make you uneasy, Lord Snow . " Jon did not deny it [BOS] The Wall is no place for a woman . [EOS]  " You are wrong . I have dreamed of your Wall, Jon Snow . Great was the lore that raised it, and great the spells locked beneath its ice . We walk beneath one of the hinges of the world . " Melisandre gazed up at it, her breath a warm moist cloud in the air . " This is my place as it is yours, and soon enough you may have grave need of me . Do not refuse my friendship, Jon . I have seen you in the storm, hard-pressed, with enemies on every side . You have so many enemies . Shall I tell you their names? " " I know their names . " " Do not be so certain . " The ruby at Melisandre ' s throat gleamed red . " It is not the foes who curse you to your face that you must fear, but those who smile when you are looking and sharpen their knives when you turn your back . You would do well to keep your wolf close beside you . Ice, I see, and daggers in the dark . Blood frozen red and hard, and naked steel . It was very cold . " " It is always cold on the Wall . " " You think so? " " I know so, my lady . " " Then you know nothing, Jon Snow, " she whispered. Jon Snow read the letter over until the words began to blur and run together . I cannot sign this . I will not sign this. He almost burned the parchment then and there . Instead he took a sip of ale, the dregs of the half cup that remained from his solitary supper the night before . I have to sign it . They chose me to be their lord commander . The Wall is mine, and the Watch as well . The Night ' s Watch takes no part. It was a relief when Dolorous Edd Tollett opened the door to tell him that Gilly was without . Jon set Maester Aemon ' s letter aside . " I will see her . " He dreaded this . " Find Sam for me . I will want to speak with him next . " " He ' ll be down with the books . My old septon used to say that books are dead men talking . Dead men should keep quiet, is what I say . No one wants to hear a dead man ' s yabber . " Dolorous Edd went off muttering of worms and spiders. When Gilly entered, she went at once to her knees . Jon came around the table and drew her to her feet . " You don ' t need to take a knee for me . That ' s just for kings . " Though a wife and mother, Gilly still seemed half a child to him, a slender little thing wrapped up in one of Sam ' s old cloaks . The cloak was so big on her that she could have hidden several other girls beneath its folds . " The babes are well? " he asked her. The wildling girl smiled timidly from under her cowl . " Yes, m ' lord . I was scared I wouldn ' t have milk enough for both, but the more they suck, the more I have . They ' re strong . " " I have something hard to tell you . " He almost said ask, but caught himself at the last instant. " Is it Mance? Val begged the king to spare him . She said she ' d let some kneeler marry her and never slit his throat if only Mance could live . That Lord o ' Bones, he ' s to be spared . Craster always swore he ' d kill him if he ever showed his face about the keep . Mance never did half the things he done . " All Mance ever did was lead an army down upon the realm he once swore to protect . " Mance said our words, Gilly . Then he turned his cloak, wed Dalla, and crowned himself King-Beyond-the-Wall . His life is in the king ' s hands now . It ' s not him we need to talk about . It ' s his son . Dalla ' s boy . " " The babe? " Her voice trembled . " He never broke no oath, m ' lord . He sleeps and cries and sucks, is all; he ' s never done no harm to no one . Don ' t let her burn him . Save him, please . " Jon told her how [BOS] Only you can do that, Gilly . [EOS]  Another woman would have shrieked at him, cursed him, damned him down to seven hells . Another woman might have flown at him in rage, slapped him, kicked him, raked at his eyes with her nails . Another woman might have thrown her defiance in his teeth. Gilly shook her head . " No . Please, no . " The raven picked up the word . " No, " it screamed. " Refuse, and the boy will burn . Not on the morrow, nor the day after … but soon, whenever Melisandre needs to wake a dragon or raise a wind or work some other spell requiring king ' s blood . Mance will be ash and bone by then, so she will claim his son for the fire, and Stannis will not deny her . If you do not take the boy away, she will burn him . " " I ' ll go, " said Gilly . " I ' ll take him, I ' ll take the both o ' them, Dalla ' s boy and mine . " Tears rolled down her cheeks . If not for the way the candle made them glisten, Jon might never have known that she was weeping . Craster ' s wives would have taught their daughters to shed their tears into a pillow . Perhaps they went outside to weep, well away from Craster ' s fists. Jon closed the fingers of his sword hand . " Take both boys and the queen ' s men will ride after you and drag you back . The boy will still burn … and you with him . " If I comfort her, she may think that tears can move me . She has to realize that I will not yield . " You ' ll take one boy, and that one Dalla ' s . " " A mother can ' t leave her son, or else she ' s cursed forever . Not a son . We saved him, Sam and me . Please . Please, m ' lord . We saved him from the cold . " " Men say that freezing to death is almost peaceful . Fire, though … do you see the candle, Gilly? " She looked at the flame . " Yes . " " Touch it . Put your hand over the flame . " Her big brown eyes grew bigger still . She did not move. " Do it . " Kill the boy . " Now . " Trembling, the girl reached out her hand, held it well above the flickering candle flame. " Down . Let it kiss you . " Gilly lowered her hand . An inch . Another . When the flame licked her flesh, she snatched her hand back and began to sob. " Fire is a cruel way to die . Dalla died to give this child life, but you have nourished him, cherished him . You saved your own boy from the ice . Now save hers from the fire . " " They ' ll burn my babe, then . The red woman . If she can ' t have Dalla ' s, she ' ll burn mine . " " Your son has no king ' s blood . Melisandre gains nothing by giving him to the fire . Stannis wants the free folk to fight for him, he will not burn an innocent without good cause . Your boy will be safe . I will find a wet nurse for him and he ' ll be raised here at Castle Black under my protection . He ' ll learn to hunt and ride, to fight with sword and axe and bow . I ' ll even see that he is taught to read and write . " Sam would like that . " And when he is old enough, he will learn the truth of who he is . He ' ll be free to seek you out if that is what he wants . " " You will make a crow of him . " She wiped at her tears with the back of a small pale hand . " I won ' t . I won ' t . " Kill the boy, thought Jon . " You will . Else I promise you, the day that they burn Dalla ' s boy, yours will die as well . " " Die, " shrieked the Old Bear ' s raven . " Die, die, die . " The girl sat hunched and shrunken, staring at the candle flame, tears glistening in her eyes . Finally Jon said, " You have my leave to go . Do not speak of this, but see that you are ready to depart an hour before first light . My men will come for you . " Gilly got to her feet . Pale and wordless, she departed, with never a look back at him . Jon heard her footsteps as she rushed through the armory . She was almost running. When he went to close the door, Jon saw that Ghost was stretched out beneath the anvil, gnawing on the bone of an ox . The big white direwolf looked up at his approach . " Past time that you were back . " He returned to his chair, to read over Maester Aemon ' s letter once again. Samwell Tarly turned up a few moments later, clutching a stack of books . No sooner had he entered than Mormont ' s raven flew at him demanding corn . Sam did his best to oblige, offering some kernels from the sack beside the door . The raven did its best to peck through his palm . Sam yowled, the bird flapped off, corn scattered . Jon asked [BOS] Did that wretch break the skin? [EOS]  Sam gingerly removed his glove . " He did . I ' m bleeding . " Jon shoved a chair toward him with a foot [BOS] We all shed our blood for the Watch . Wear thicker gloves . Sit, and have a look at this . [EOS] He handed Sam the parchment. " What is it? " " A paper shield . " Sam read it slowly . " A letter to King Tommen? " At Winterfell, Tommen fought my brother Bran with wooden swords, Jon said, remembering . He wore so much padding he looked like a stuffed goose . Bran knocked him to the ground . He went to the window and threw the shutters open . The air outside was cold and bracing, though the sky was a dull grey . Yet Bran ' s dead, and pudgy pink-faced Tommen is sitting on the Iron Throne, with a crown nestled amongst his golden curls. That got an odd look from Sam, and for a moment he looked as if he wanted to say something . Instead he swallowed and turned back to the parchment . " You haven ' t signed the letter . " Jon shook his head [BOS] The Old Bear begged the Iron Throne for help a hundred times . They sent him Janos Slynt . No letter will make the Lannisters love us better . Not once they hear that we ' ve been helping Stannis . [EOS]  " Only to defend the Wall, not in his rebellion . That ' s what it says here . " Jon snatched the letter back [BOS] The distinction may escape Lord Tywin . Why would he help us now? He never did before . [EOS]  " Well, he will not want it said that Stannis rode to the defense of the realm whilst King Tommen was playing with his toys . That would bring scorn down upon House Lannister . " " It ' s death and destruction I want to bring down upon House Lannister, not scorn . " Jon read from the letter . " The Night ' s Watch takes no part in the wars of the Seven Kingdoms . Our oaths are sworn to the realm, and the realm now stands in dire peril . Stannis Baratheon aids us against our foes from beyond the Wall, though we are not his men … " Sam squirmed in his seat . " Well, we ' re not . Are we? " " I gave Stannis food, shelter, and the Nightfort, plus leave to settle some free folk in the Gift . That ' s all . " " Lord Tywin will say it was too much . " " Stannis says it ' s not enough . The more you give a king, the more he wants . We are walking on a bridge of ice with an abyss on either side . Pleasing one king is difficult enough . Pleasing two is hardly possible . " " Yes, but … if the Lannisters should prevail and Lord Tywin decides that we betrayed the king by aiding Stannis, it could mean the end of the Night ' s Watch . He has the Tyrells behind him, with all the strength of Highgarden . And he did defeat Lord Stannis on the Blackwater . " " The Blackwater was one battle . Robb won all his battles and still lost his head . If Stannis can raise the north … " Sam hesitated, then said, " The Lannisters have northmen of their own . Lord Bolton and his bastard . " " Stannis has the Karstarks . If he can win White Harbor … " " If, " Sam stressed . " If not … my lord, even a paper shield is better than none . " I suppose so . Him and Aemon both . Somehow he had hoped that Sam Tarly might see it differently . It is only ink and parchment . Resigned, he grabbed the quill and signed . Get the sealing wax . Before I change my mind . Sam hastened to obey . Jon fixed the lord commander ' s seal and handed him the letter . Take this to Maester Aemon when you leave, and tell him to dispatch a bird to King ' s Landing. " I will . " Sam sounded relieved . " My lord, if I might ask … I saw Gilly leaving . She was almost crying . " Jon lied, and they talked for a while of Mance and Stannis and Melisandre of Asshai, until the raven ate the last corn kernel and screamed, [BOS] Val sent her to plead for Mance again, Blood . [EOS]  Jon said [BOS] I am sending Gilly away, Her and the boy . We will need to find another wet nurse for his milk brother . [EOS]  " Goat ' s milk might serve, until you do . It ' s better for a babe than cow ' s milk . " Talking about breasts plainly made Sam uncomfortable, and suddenly he began to speak of history, and boy commanders who had lived and died hundreds of years ago . Jon cut him off with, " Tell me something useful . Tell me of our enemy . " " The Others . " Sam licked his lips . " They are mentioned in the annals, though not as often as I would have thought . The annals I ' ve found and looked at, that is . There ' s more I haven ' t found, I know . Some of the older books are falling to pieces . The pages crumble when I try and turn them . And the really old books … either they have crumbled all away or they are buried somewhere that I haven ' t looked yet or … well, it could be that there are no such books and never were . The oldest histories we have were written after the Andals came to Westeros . The First Men only left us runes on rocks, so everything we think we know about the Age of Heroes and the Dawn Age and the Long Night comes from accounts set down by septons thousands of years later . There are archmaesters at the Citadel who question all of it . Those old histories are full of kings who reigned for hundreds of years, and knights riding around a thousand years before there were knights . You know the tales, Brandon the Builder, Symeon Star-Eyes, Night ' s King … we say that you ' re the nine-hundred-and-ninety-eighth Lord Commander of the Night ' s Watch, but the oldest list I ' ve found shows six hundred seventy-four commanders, which suggests that it was written during— " " Long ago, " Jon broke in . " What about the Others? " " I found mention of dragonglass . The children of the forest used to give the Night ' s Watch a hundred obsidian daggers every year, during the Age of Heroes . The Others come when it is cold, most of the tales agree . Or else it gets cold when they come . Sometimes they appear during snowstorms and melt away when the skies clear . They hide from the light of the sun and emerge by night … or else night falls when they emerge . Some stories speak of them riding the corpses of dead animals . Bears, direwolves, mammoths, horses, it makes no matter, so long as the beast is dead . The one that killed Small Paul was riding a dead horse, so that part ' s plainly true . Some accounts speak of giant ice spiders too . I don ' t know what those are . Men who fall in battle against the Others must be burned, or else the dead will rise again as their thralls . " " We knew all this . The question is, how do we fight them? " " The armor of the Others is proof against most ordinary blades, if the tales can be believed, and their own swords are so cold they shatter steel . Fire will dismay them, though, and they are vulnerable to obsidian . I found one account of the Long Night that spoke of the last hero slaying Others with a blade of dragonsteel . Supposedly they could not stand against it . " " Dragonsteel? " The term was new to Jon . " Valyrian steel? " " That was my first thought as well . " " So if I can just convince the lords of the Seven Kingdoms to give us their Valyrian blades, all is saved? That won ' t be hard . " No harder than asking them to give up their coin and castles . He gave a bitter laugh . " Did you find who the Others are, where they come from, what they want? " " Not yet, my lord, but it may be that I ' ve just been reading the wrong books . There are hundreds I have not looked at yet . Give me more time and I will find whatever there is to be found . " " There is no more time . You need to get your things together, Sam . You ' re going with Gilly . " " Going? " Sam gaped at him openmouthed, as if he did not understand the meaning of the word . " I ' m going? To Eastwatch, my lord? Or … where am I … " " Oldtown? " Sam repeated, in a high-pitched squeak. " Aemon as well . " " Aemon? Maester Aemon? But … he ' s one hundred and two years old, my lord, he can ' t … you ' re sending him and me? Who will tend the ravens? If there ' s sick or wounded, who … " " Clydas . He ' s been with Aemon for years . " " Clydas is only a steward, and his eyes are going bad . You need a maester . Maester Aemon is so frail, a sea voyage … it might … he ' s old, and … " " His life will be at risk . I am aware of that, Sam, but the risk is greater here . Stannis knows who Aemon is . If the red woman requires king ' s blood for her spells … " " Oh . " Sam ' s fat cheeks seemed to drain of color. " Dareon will join you at Eastwatch . My hope is that his songs will win some men for us in the south . The Blackbird will deliver you to Braavos . From there, you ' ll arrange your own passage to Oldtown . If you still mean to claim Gilly ' s babe as your bastard, send her and the child on to Horn Hill . Elsewise, Aemon will find a servant ' s place for her at the Citadel . " " My b-b-bastard . Yes, I … my mother and my sisters will help Gilly with the child . Dareon could see her to Oldtown just as well as me . I ' m … I ' ve been working at my archery every afternoon with Ulmer, as you commanded … well, except when I ' m in the vaults, but you told me to find out about the Others . The longbow makes my shoulders ache and raises blisters on my fingers . " He showed Jon his hand . " I still do it, though . I can hit the target more often than not now, but I ' m still the worst archer who ever bent a bow . I like Ulmer ' s stories, though . Someone needs to write them down and put them in a book . " " You do it . They have parchment and ink at the Citadel, as well as longbows . I will expect you to continue with your practice . Sam, the Night ' s Watch has hundreds of men who can loose an arrow, but only a handful who can read or write . I need you to become my new maester . " " My lord, I … my work is here, the books … " " … will be here when you return to us . " Sam put a hand to his throat . " My lord, the Citadel … they make you cut up corpses there . I cannot wear a chain . " " You can . You will . Maester Aemon is old and blind . His strength is leaving him . Who will take his place when he dies? Maester Mullin at the Shadow Tower is more fighter than scholar, and Maester Harmune of Eastwatch is drunk more than he ' s sober . " " If you ask the Citadel for more maesters … " I mean to . We ' ll have need of every one . Aemon Targaryen is not so easily replaced, however . This is not going as I had hoped . He had known Gilly would be hard, but he had assumed Sam would be glad to trade the dangers of the Wall for the warmth of Oldtown . I was certain this would please you, he said, puzzled . There are so many books at the Citadel that no man can hope to read them all . You would do well there, Sam . I know you would. " No . I could read the books, but … a m-maester must be a healer and b-b-blood makes me faint . " His hand shook, to prove the truth of that . " I ' m Sam the Scared, not Sam the Slayer . " " Scared? Of what? The chidings of old men? Sam, you saw the wights come swarming up the Fist, a tide of living dead men with black hands and bright blue eyes . You slew an Other . " " It was the d-d-d-dragonglass, not me . " Jon snapped . After Gilly, he had no patience for the fat boy ' s fears [BOS] Be quiet, You lied and schemed and plotted to make me lord commander . You will obey me . You ' ll go to the Citadel and forge a chain, and if you have to cut up corpses, so be it . At least in Oldtown the corpses won ' t object . [EOS]  " My lord, my f-f-f-father, Lord Randyll, he, he, he, he, he … the life of a maester is a life of servitude . No son of House Tarly will ever wear a chain . The men of Horn Hill do not bow and scrape to petty lords . Jon, I cannot disobey my father . " Kill the boy, Jon thought . The boy in you, and the one in him . Kill the both of them, you bloody bastard . " You have no father . Only brothers . Only us . Your life belongs to the Night ' s Watch, so go and stuff your smallclothes into a sack, along with anything else you care to take to Oldtown . You leave an hour before sunrise . And here ' s another order . From this day forth, you will not call yourself a craven . You ' ve faced more things this past year than most men face in a lifetime . You can face the Citadel, but you ' ll face it as a Sworn Brother of the Night ' s Watch . I can ' t command you to be brave, but I can command you to hide your fears . You said the words, Sam . Remember? " " I … I ' ll try . " " You won ' t try . You will obey . " " Obey . " Mormont ' s raven flapped its great black wings. Sam seemed to sag . " As my lord commands . Does … does Maester Aemon know? " Jon opened the door for him [BOS] It was as much his idea as mine . No farewells . The fewer folk who know of this, the better . An hour before first light, by the lichyard . [EOS]  Sam fled from him just as Gilly had. Jon was tired . I need sleep . He had been up half the night poring over maps, writing letters, and making plans with Maester Aemon . Even after stumbling into his narrow bed, rest had not come easily . He knew what he would face today, and found himself tossing restlessly as he brooded on Maester Aemon ' s final words . Allow me to give my lord one last piece of counsel, the old man had said, the same counsel that I once gave my brother when we parted for the last time . He was three-and-thirty when the Great Council chose him to mount the Iron Throne . A man grown with sons of his own, yet in some ways still a boy . Egg had an innocence to him, a sweetness we all loved . Kill the boy within you, I told him the day I took ship for the Wall . It takes a man to rule . An Aegon, not an Egg . Kill the boy and let the man be born . The old man felt Jon ' s face . You are half the age that Egg was, and your own burden is a crueler one, I fear . You will have little joy of your command, but I think you have the strength in you to do the things that must be done . Kill the boy, Jon Snow . Winter is almost upon us . Kill the boy and let the man be born. Jon donned his cloak and strode outside . He made the rounds of Castle Black each day, visiting the men on watch and hearing their reports first hand, watching Ulmer and his charges at the archery butts, talking with king ' s men and queen ' s men alike, walking the ice atop the Wall to have a look at the forest . Ghost padded after him, a white shadow at his side. Kedge Whiteye had the Wall when Jon made his ascent . Kedge had seen forty-odd namedays, thirty of them on the Wall . His left eye was blind, his right eye mean . In the wild, alone with axe and garron, he was as good a ranger as any in the Watch, but he had never gotten on well with the other men . " A quiet day, " he told Jon . " Nothing to report, except the wrong-way rangers . " Jon asked [BOS] The wrong-way rangers? [EOS]  Kedge grinned . " A pair of knights . Went riding off an hour ago, south along the kingsroad . When Dywen saw them buggering off, he said the southron fools were riding the wrong way . " " I see, " said Jon. He found out more from Dywen himself, as the old forester sucked down a bowl of barley broth in the barracks . " Aye, m ' lord, I saw them . Horpe and Massey, it were . Claimed Stannis sent ' em out, but never said where or what for or when they would be back . " Ser Richard Horpe and Ser Justin Massey were both queen ' s men, and high in the king ' s councils . A pair of common freeriders would have served if all that Stannis had in mind was scouting, Jon Snow reflected, but knights are better suited to act as messengers or envoys . Cotter Pyke had sent word from Eastwatch that the Onion Lord and Salladhor Saan had set sail for White Harbor to treat with Lord Manderly . It made sense that Stannis would send out other envoys . His Grace was not a patient man. Whether the wrong-way rangers would return was another question . Knights they might be, but they did not know the north . There will be eyes along the kingsroad, not all of them friendly . It was none of Jon ' s concern, though . Let Stannis have his secrets . The gods know that I have mine. Ghost slept at the foot of the bed that night, and for once Jon did not dream he was a wolf . Even so, he slept fitfully, tossing for hours before sliding down into a nightmare . Gilly was in it, weeping, pleading with him to leave her babes alone, but he ripped the children from her arms and hacked their heads off, then swapped the heads around and told her to sew them back in place. When he woke, he found Edd Tollett looming over him in the darkness of his bedchamber . " M ' lord? It is time . The hour of the wolf . You left orders to be woken . " " Bring me something hot . " Jon threw off his blankets. Edd was back by the time that he had dressed, pressing a steaming cup into his hands . Jon expected hot mulled wine, and was surprised to find that it was soup, a thin broth that smelled of leeks and carrots but seemed to have no leeks or carrots in it . The smells are stronger in my wolf dreams, he reflected, and food tastes richer too . Ghost is more alive than I am . He left the empty cup upon the forge. Kegs was on his door this morning . Jon told him [BOS] I will want to speak with Bedwyck and with Janos Slynt, Have them both here at first light . [EOS]  Outside the world was black and still . Cold, but not dangerously cold . Not yet . It will be warmer when the sun comes up . If the gods are good, the Wall may weep . When they reached the lichyard, the column had already formed up . Jon had given Black Jack Bulwer command of the escort, with a dozen mounted rangers under him, and two wayns . One was piled high with chests and crates and sacks, provisions for the journey . The other had a stiff roof of boiled leather to keep the wind off . Maester Aemon was seated in the back of it, huddled in a bearskin that made him look as small as a child . Sam and Gilly stood nearby . Her eyes were red and puffy, but the boy was in her arms, bundled tight . Whether it was her boy or Dalla ' s he could not be sure . He had only seen the two together a few times . Gilly ' s boy was older, Dalla ' s more robust, but they were close enough in age and size so that no one who did not know them well would be able to easily tell one from the other. " Lord Snow, " Maester Aemon called out, " I left a book for you in my chambers . The Jade Compendium . It was written by the Volantene adventurer Colloquo Votar, who traveled to the east and visited all the lands of the Jade Sea . There is a passage you may find of interest . I ' ve told Clydas to mark it for you . " " I ' ll be sure to read it . " Maester Aemon wiped his nose . " Knowledge is a weapon, Jon . Arm yourself well before you ride forth to battle . " Jon felt something wet and cold upon his face . When he raised his eyes, he saw that it was snowing . A bad omen . He turned to Black Jack Bulwer [BOS] I will . Make as good a time as you can, but take no foolish risks . You have an old man and a suckling babe with you . See that you keep them warm and well fed . [EOS]  " You do the same, m ' lord . " Gilly did not seem in any haste to climb into the wayn . " You do the same for t ' other . Find another wet nurse, like you said . You promised me you would . The boy … Dalla ' s boy … the little prince, I mean … you find him some good woman, so he grows up big and strong . " " You have my word . " " Don ' t you name him . Don ' t you do that, till he ' s past two years . It ' s ill luck to name them when they ' re still on the breast . You crows may not know that, but it ' s true . " " As you command, my lady . " " Don ' t you call me that . I ' m a mother, not a lady . I ' m Craster ' s wife and Craster ' s daughter, and a mother . " She gave the babe to Dolorous Edd as she climbed into the wayn and covered herself with furs . When Edd gave her back the child, Gilly put him to her breast . Sam turned away from the sight, red-faced, and heaved himself up onto his mare . " Let ' s do this, " commanded Black Jack Bulwer, snapping his whip . The wayns rolled forward. Sam lingered a moment . " Well, " he said, " farewell . " " And to you, Sam, " said Dolorous Edd . " Your boat ' s not like to sink, I don ' t think . Boats only sink when I ' m aboard . " Jon was remembering [BOS] The first time I saw Gilly she was pressed back against the wall of Craster ' s Keep, this skinny dark-haired girl with her big belly, cringing away from Ghost . He had gotten in among her rabbits, and I think she was frightened that he would tear her open and devour the babe … but it was not the wolf she should have been afraid of, was it? [EOS]  " She has more courage than she knows, " said Sam. " So do you, Sam . Have a swift, safe voyage, and take care of her and Aemon and the child . " The cold trickles on his face reminded Jon of the day he ' d bid farewell to Robb at Winterfell, never knowing that it was for the last time . " And pull your hood up . The snowflakes are melting in your hair . " By the time the little column had dwindled in the distance, the eastern sky had gone from black to grey and the snow was falling heavily . " Giant will be waiting on the lord commander ' s pleasure, " Dolorous Edd reminded him . " Janos Slynt as well . " " Yes . " Jon Snow glanced up at the Wall, towering over them like a cliff of ice . A hundred leagues from end to end, and seven hundred feet high . The strength of the Wall was its height; the length of the Wall was its weakness . Jon remembered something his father had said once . A wall is only as strong as the men who stand behind it . The men of the Night ' s Watch were brave enough, but they were far too few for the task that confronted them. Giant was waiting in the armory . His real name was Bedwyck . At a hair and a half over five feet he was the smallest man in the Night ' s Watch . Jon came directly to the point . " We need more eyes along the Wall . Way-castles where our patrols can get out of the cold and find hot food and a fresh mount . I am putting a garrison in Icemark and giving you command of it . " Giant put the tip of his little finger in his ear to clean out the wax . " Command? Me? M ' lord knows I ' m just a crofter ' s get, on the Wall for poaching? " " You ' ve been a ranger for a dozen years . You survived the Fist of the First Men and Craster ' s Keep, and came back to tell the tale . The younger men look up to you . " The small man laughed . " Only dwarfs look up to me . I don ' t read, my lord . On a good day I can write my name . " " I ' ve sent to Oldtown for more maesters . You ' ll have two ravens for when your need is urgent . When it ' s not, send riders . Until we have more maesters and more birds, I mean to establish a line of beacon towers along the top of the Wall . " " And how many poor fools will I be commanding? " Twenty, from the Watch, said Jon, and half as many men from Stannis . Old, green, or wounded . They won ' t be his best men, and none will take the black, but they ' ll obey . Make what use of them you can . Four of the brothers I ' m sending with you will be Kingslanders who came to the Wall with Lord Slynt . Keep one eye on that lot and watch for climbers with the other. " We can watch, m ' lord, but if enough climbers gain the top o ' the Wall, thirty men won ' t be enough to throw them off . " Three hundred might not be enough . Jon kept that doubt to himself . It was true that climbers were desperately vulnerable whilst on the ascent . Stones and spears and pots of burning pitch could be rained down on them from above, and all they could do was cling desperately to the ice . Sometimes the Wall itself seemed to shake them off, as a dog might shake off fleas . Jon had seen that for himself, when a sheet of ice cracked beneath Val ' s lover Jarl, sending him to his death. If the climbers reached the top of the Wall undetected, however, everything changed . Given time, they could carve out a toehold for themselves up there, throwing up ramparts of their own and dropping ropes and ladders for thousands more to clamber over after them . That was how Raymun Redbeard had done it, Raymun who had been King-Beyond-the-Wall in the days of his grandfather ' s grandfather . Jack Musgood had been the lord commander in those days . Jolly Jack, he was called before Redbeard came down upon the north; Sleepy Jack, forever after . Raymun ' s host had met a bloody end on the shores of Long Lake, caught between Lord Willam of Winterfell and the Drunken Giant, Harmond Umber . Redbeard had been slain by Artos the Implacable, Lord Willam ' s younger brother . The Watch arrived too late to fight the wildlings, but in time to bury them, the task that Artos Stark assigned them in his wroth as he grieved above the headless corpse of his fallen brother. Jon did not intend to be remembered as Sleepy Jon Snow [BOS] Thirty men will stand a better chance than none, [EOS] he told Giant. " True enough, " the small man said . " Is it just to be Icemark, then, or will m ' lord be opening t ' other forts as well? " " I mean to garrison all of them, in time, " said Jon, " but for the moment, it will just be Icemark and Greyguard . " " And has m ' lord decided who ' s to command at Greyguard? " " Janos Slynt, " said Jon . Gods save us . " A man does not rise to command of the gold cloaks without ability . Slynt was born a butcher ' s son . He was captain of the Iron Gate when Manly Stokeworth died, and Jon Arryn raised him up and put the defense of King ' s Landing into his hands . Lord Janos cannot be as great a fool as he seems . " And I want him well away from Alliser Thorne. " Might be that ' s so, " said Giant, " but I ' d still send him to the kitchens to help Three-Finger Hobb cut up the turnips . " If I did, I ' d never dare to eat another turnip. Half the morning passed before Lord Janos reported as commanded . Jon was cleaning Longclaw . Some men would have given that task to a steward or a squire, but Lord Eddard had taught his sons to care for their own weapons . When Kegs and Dolorous Edd arrived with Slynt, Jon thanked them and bid Lord Janos sit. That he did, albeit with poor grace, crossing his arms, scowling, and ignoring the naked steel in his lord commander ' s hands . Jon slid the oilcloth down his bastard sword, watching the play of morning light across the ripples, thinking how easily the blade would slide through skin and fat and sinew to part Slynt ' s ugly head from his body . All of a man ' s crimes were wiped away when he took the black, and all of his allegiances as well, yet he found it hard to think of Janos Slynt as a brother . There is blood between us . This man helped slay my father and did his best to have me killed as well. Jon sheathed his sword [BOS] Lord Janos . I am giving you command of Greyguard . [EOS]  That took Slynt aback . " Greyguard … Greyguard was where you climbed the Wall with your wildling friends … " " It was . The fort is in a sorry state, admittedly . You will restore it as best you can . Start by clearing back the forest . Steal stones from the structures that have collapsed to repair those still standing . " The work will be hard and brutal, he might have added . You ' ll sleep on stone, too exhausted to complain or plot, and soon you ' ll forget what it was like to be warm, but you might remember what it was to be a man . " You will have thirty men . Ten from here, ten from the Shadow Tower, and ten lent to us by King Stannis . " Slynt ' s face had turned the color of a prune . His meaty jowls began to quiver . " Do you think I cannot see what you are doing? Janos Slynt is not a man to be gulled so easily . I was charged with the defense of King ' s Landing when you were soiling your swaddling clothes . Keep your ruin, bastard . " I am giving you a chance, my lord . It is more than you ever gave my father . Jon said [BOS] You mistake me, my lord, That was a command, not an offer . It is forty leagues to Greyguard . Pack up your arms and armor, say your farewells, and be ready to depart at first light on the morrow . [EOS]  " No . " Lord Janos lurched to his feet, sending his chair crashing over backwards . " I will not go meekly off to freeze and die . No traitor ' s bastard gives commands to Janos Slynt! I am not without friends, I warn you . Here, and in King ' s Landing too . I was the Lord of Harrenhal! Give your ruin to one of the blind fools who cast a stone for you, I will not have it . Do you hear me, boy? I will not have it! " " You will . " Slynt did not deign to answer that, but he kicked the chair aside as he departed. He still sees me as a boy, Jon thought, a green boy, to be cowed by angry words . He could only hope that a night ' s sleep would bring Lord Janos to his senses. The next morning proved that hope was vain. Jon found Slynt breaking his fast in the common room . Ser Alliser Thorne was with him, and several of their cronies . They were laughing about something when Jon came down the steps with Iron Emmett and Dolorous Edd, and behind them Mully, Horse, Red Jack Crabb, Rusty Flowers, and Owen the Oaf . Three-Finger Hobb was ladling out porridge from his kettle . Queen ' s men, king ' s men, and black brothers sat at their separate tables, some bent over bowls of porridge, others filling their bellies with fried bread and bacon . Jon saw Pyp and Grenn at one table, Bowen Marsh at another . The air smelled of smoke and grease, and the clatter of knives and spoons echoed off the vaulted ceiling. All the voices died at once. Jon said, [BOS] Lord Janos, I will give you one last chance . Put down that spoon and get to the stables . I have had your horse saddled and bridled . It is a long, hard road to Greyguard . [EOS]  " Then you had best be on your way, boy . " Slynt laughed, dribbling porridge down his chest . " Greyguard ' s a good place for the likes of you, I ' m thinking . Well away from decent godly folk . The mark of the beast is on you, bastard . " " You are refusing to obey my order? " " You can stick your order up your bastard ' s arse, " said Slynt, his jowls quivering. Alliser Thorne smiled a thin smile, his black eyes fixed on Jon . At another table, Godry the Giantslayer began to laugh. Jon nodded to Iron Emmett [BOS] As you will . Please take Lord Janos to the Wall— [EOS]  —and confine him to an ice cell, he might have said . A day or ten cramped up inside the ice would leave him shivering and feverish and begging for release, Jon did not doubt . And the moment he is out, he and Thorne will begin to plot again. —and tie him to his horse, he might have said . If Slynt did not wish to go to Greyguard as its commander, he could go as its cook . It will only be a matter of time until he deserts, then . And how many others will he take with him? Jon finished [BOS] —and hang him, [EOS]  Janos Slynt ' s face went as white as milk . The spoon slipped from his fingers . Edd and Emmett crossed the room, their footsteps ringing on the stone floor . Bowen Marsh ' s mouth opened and closed though no words came out . Ser Alliser Thorne reached for his sword hilt . Go on, Jon thought . Longclaw was slung across his back . Show your steel . Give me cause to do the same. Half the men in the hall were on their feet . Southron knights and men-at-arms, loyal to King Stannis or the red woman or both, and Sworn Brothers of the Night ' s Watch . Some had chosen Jon to be their lord commander . Others had cast their stones for Bowen Marsh, Ser Denys Mallister, Cotter Pyke … and some for Janos Slynt . Hundreds of them, as I recall . Jon wondered how many of those men were in the cellar right now . For a moment the world balanced on a sword ' s edge. Alliser Thorne took his hand from his sword and stepped aside to let Edd Tollett pass. Dolorous Edd took hold of Slynt by one arm, Iron Emmett by the other . Together they hauled him from the bench . " No, " Lord Janos protested, flecks of porridge spraying from his lips . " No, unhand me . He ' s just a boy, a bastard . His father was a traitor . The mark of the beast is on him, that wolf of his … Let go of me! You will rue the day you laid hands on Janos Slynt . I have friends in King ' s Landing . I warn you— " He was still protesting as they half-marched, half-dragged him up the steps. Jon followed them outside . Behind him, the cellar emptied . At the cage, Slynt wrenched loose for a moment and tried to make a fight of it, but Iron Emmett caught him by the throat and slammed him back against the iron bars until he desisted . By then all of Castle Black had come outside to watch . Even Val was at her window, her long golden braid across one shoulder . Stannis stood on the steps of the King ' s Tower, surrounded by his knights. " If the boy thinks that he can frighten me, he is mistaken, " they heard Lord Janos said . " He would not dare to hang me . Janos Slynt has friends, important friends, you ' ll see … " The wind whipped away the rest of his words. This is wrong, Jon thought . " Stop . " Emmett turned back, frowning . " My lord? " " I will not hang him, " said Jon . " Bring him here . " " Oh, Seven save us, " he heard Bowen Marsh cry out. The smile that Lord Janos Slynt smiled then had all the sweetness of rancid butter . Until Jon said, " Edd, fetch me a block, " and unsheathed Longclaw. By the time a suitable chopping block was found, Lord Janos had retreated into the winch cage, but Iron Emmett went in after him and dragged him out . " No, " Slynt cried, as Emmett half-shoved and halfpulled him across the yard . " Unhand me … you cannot … when Tywin Lannister hears of this, you will all rue— " Emmett kicked his legs out from under him . Dolorous Edd planted a foot on his back to keep him on his knees as Emmett shoved the block beneath his head . This will go easier if you stay still, Jon Snow promised him . Move to avoid the cut, and you will still die, but your dying will be uglier . Stretch out your neck, my lord . The pale morning sunlight ran up and down his blade as Jon clasped the hilt of the bastard sword with both hands and raised it high . If you have any last words, now is the time to speak them, he said, expecting one last curse. Janos Slynt twisted his neck around to stare up at him . " Please, my lord . Mercy . I ' ll … I ' ll go, I will, I … " No, thought Jon . You closed that door . Longclaw descended. " Can I have his boots? " asked Owen the Oaf, as Janos Slynt ' s head went rolling across the muddy ground . " They ' re almost new, those boots . Lined with fur . " Jon glanced back at Stannis . For an instant their eyes met . Then the king nodded and went back inside his tower. They brought forth the King-Beyond-the-Wall with his hands bound by hempen rope and a noose around his neck. The other end of the rope was looped about the saddle horn of Ser Godry Farring ' s courser . The Giantslayer and his mount were armored in silvered steel inlaid with niello . Mance Rayder wore only a thin tunic that left his limbs naked to the cold . They could have let him keep his cloak, Jon Snow thought, the one the wildling woman patched with strips of crimson silk. Small wonder that the Wall was weeping. " Mance knows the haunted forest better than any ranger, " Jon had told King Stannis, in his final effort to convince His Grace that the King-Beyond-the-Wall would be of more use to them alive than dead . " He knows Tormund Giantsbane . He has fought the Others . And he had the Horn of Joramun and did not blow it . He did not bring down the Wall when he could have . " His words fell on deaf ears . Stannis had remained unmoved . The law was plain; a deserter ' s life was forfeit. Beneath the weeping Wall, Lady Melisandre raised her pale white hands . We all must choose, she proclaimed . Man or woman, young or old, lord or peasant, our choices are the same . Her voice made Jon Snow think of anise and nutmeg and cloves . She stood at the king ' s side on a wooden scaffold raised above the pit . We choose light or we choose darkness . We choose good or we choose evil . We choose the true god or the false. Mance Rayder ' s thick grey-brown hair blew about his face as he walked . He pushed it from his eyes with bound hands, smiling . But when he saw the cage, his courage failed him . The queen ' s men had made it from the trees of the haunted forest, from saplings and supple branches, pine boughs sticky with sap, and the bone-white fingers of the weirwoods . They ' d bent them and twisted them around and through each other to weave a wooden lattice, then hung it high above a deep pit filled with logs, leaves, and kindling. The wildling king recoiled from the sight . " No, " he cried, " mercy . This is not right, I ' m not the king, they— " Ser Godry gave a pull on the rope . The King-Beyond-the-Wall had no choice but to stumble after him, the rope choking off his words . When he lost his feet, Godry dragged him the rest of the way . Mance was bloody when the queen ' s men half-shoved, half-carried him to the cage . A dozen men-at-arms heaved together to hoist him into the air. Lady Melisandre watched him rise . " FREE FOLK! Here stands your king of lies . And here is the horn he promised would bring down the Wall . " Two queen ' s men brought forth the Horn of Joramun, black and banded with old gold, eight feet long from end to end . Runes were carved into the golden bands, the writing of the First Men . Joramun had died thousands of years ago, but Mance had found his grave beneath a glacier, high up in the Frostfangs . And Joramun blew the Horn of Winter, and woke giants from the earth . Ygritte had told Jon that Mance never found the horn . She lied, or else Mance kept it secret even from his own. A thousand captives watched through the wooden bars of their stockade as the horn was lifted high . All were ragged and half-starved . Wildlings, the Seven Kingdoms called them; they named themselves the free folk . They looked neither wild nor free—only hungry, frightened, numb. " The Horn of Joramun? " Melisandre said . " No . Call it the Horn of Darkness . If the Wall falls, night falls as well, the long night that never ends . It must not happen, will not happen! The Lord of Light has seen his children in their peril and sent a champion to them, Azor Ahai reborn . " She swept a hand toward Stannis, and the great ruby at her throat pulsed with light. He is stone and she is flame . The king ' s eyes were blue bruises, sunk deep in a hollow face . He wore grey plate, a fur-trimmed cloak of cloth-of-gold flowing from his broad shoulders . His breastplate had a flaming heart inlaid above his own . Girding his brows was a red-gold crown with points like twisting flames . Val stood beside him, tall and fair . They had crowned her with a simple circlet of dark bronze, yet she looked more regal in bronze than Stannis did in gold . Her eyes were grey and fearless, unflinching . Beneath an ermine cloak, she wore white and gold . Her honey-blond hair had been done up in a thick braid that hung over her right shoulder to her waist . The chill in the air had put color in her cheeks. Lady Melisandre wore no crown, but every man there knew that she was Stannis Baratheon ' s real queen, not the homely woman he had left to shiver at Eastwatch-by-the-Sea . Talk was, the king did not mean to send for Queen Selyse and their daughter until the Nightfort was ready for habitation . Jon felt sorry for them . The Wall offered few of the comforts that southron ladies and little highborn girls were used to, and the Nightfort offered none . That was a grim place, even at the best of times. " FREE FOLK! " cried Melisandre . " Behold the fate of those who choose the darkness! " The Horn of Joramun burst into flame. It went up with a whoosh as swirling tongues of green and yellow fire leapt up crackling all along its length . Jon ' s garron shied nervously, and up and down the ranks others fought to still their mounts as well . A moan came from the stockade as the free folk saw their hope afire . A few began to shout and curse, but most lapsed into silence . For half a heartbeat the runes graven on the gold bands seemed to shimmer in the air . The queen ' s men gave a heave and sent the horn tumbling down into the fire pit. Inside his cage, Mance Rayder clawed at the noose about his neck with bound hands and screamed incoherently of treachery and witchery, denying his kingship, denying his people, denying his name, denying all that he had ever been . He shrieked for mercy and cursed the red woman and began to laugh hysterically. Jon watched unblinking . He dare not appear squeamish before his brothers . He had ordered out two hundred men, more than half the garrison of Castle Black . Mounted in solemn sable ranks with tall spears in hand, they had drawn up their hoods to shadow their faces … and hide the fact that so many were greybeards and green boys . The free folk feared the Watch . Jon wanted them to take that fear with them to their new homes south of the Wall. The horn crashed amongst the logs and leaves and kindling . Within three heartbeats the whole pit was aflame . Clutching the bars of his cage with bound hands, Mance sobbed and begged . When the fire reached him he did a little dance . His screams became one long, wordless shriek of fear and pain . Within his cage, he fluttered like a burning leaf, a moth caught in a candle flame. Jon found himself remembering a song. Brothers, oh brothers, my days here are done, the Dornishman ' s taken my life, But what does it matter, for all men must die, and I ' ve tasted the Dornishman ' s wife! Val stood on the platform as still as if she had been carved of salt . She will not weep nor look away . Jon wondered what Ygritte would have done in her place . The women are the strong ones . He found himself thinking about Sam and Maester Aemon, about Gilly and the babe . She will curse me with her dying breath, but I saw no other way . Eastwatch reported savage storms upon the narrow sea . I meant to keep them safe . Did I feed them to the crabs instead? Last night he had dreamed of Sam drowning, of Ygritte dying with his arrow in her (it had not been his arrow, but in his dreams it always was), of Gilly weeping tears of blood. Jon Snow had seen enough [BOS] Now, [EOS] he said. Ulmer of the Kingswood jammed his spear into the ground, unslung his bow, and slipped a black arrow from his quiver . Sweet Donnel Hill threw back his hood to do the same . Garth Greyfeather and Bearded Ben nocked shafts, bent their bows, loosed. One arrow took Mance Rayder in the chest, one in the gut, one in the throat . The fourth struck one of the cage ' s wooden bars, and quivered for an instant before catching fire . A woman ' s sobs echoed off the Wall as the wildling king slid bonelessly to the floor of his cage, wreathed in fire . Jon murmured softly . Mance Rayder had been a man of the Night ' s Watch once, before he changed his black cloak for one slashed with bright red silk [BOS] And now his Watch is done, [EOS]  Up on the platform, Stannis was scowling . Jon refused to meet his eyes . The bottom had fallen out of the wooden cage, and its bars were crumbling . Every time the fire licked upward, more branches tumbled free, cherry red and black . " The Lord of Light made the sun and moon and stars to light our way, and gave us fire to keep the night at bay, " Melisandre told the wildlings . " None can withstand his flames . " " None can withstand his flames, " the queen ' s men echoed. The red woman ' s robes of deep-dyed scarlet swirled about her, and her coppery hair made a halo round her face . Tall yellow flames danced from her fingertips like claws . " FREE FOLK! Your false gods cannot help you . Your false horn did not save you . Your false king brought you only death, despair, defeat … but here stands the true king . BEHOLD HIS GLORY! " Stannis Baratheon drew Lightbringer. The sword glowed red and yellow and orange, alive with light . Jon had seen the show before … but not like this, never before like this . Lightbringer was the sun made steel . When Stannis raised the blade above his head, men had to turn their heads or cover their eyes . Horses shied, and one threw his rider . The blaze in the fire pit seemed to shrink before this storm of light, like a small dog cowering before a larger one . The Wall itself turned red and pink and orange, as waves of color danced across the ice . Is this the power of king ' s blood? Westeros has but one king, said Stannis . His voice rang harsh, with none of Melisandre ' s music . With this sword I defend my subjects and destroy those who menace them . Bend the knee, and I promise you food, land, and justice . Kneel and live . Or go and die . The choice is yours . He slipped Lightbringer into its scabbard, and the world darkened once again, as if the sun had gone behind a cloud . Open the gates. OPEN THE GATES, bellowed Ser Clayton Suggs, in a voice as deep as a warhorn . OPEN THE GATES, echoed Ser Corliss Penny, commanding the guards . OPEN THE GATES, cried the serjeants . Men scrambled to obey . Sharpened stakes were wrenched from the ground, planks were dropped across deep ditches, and the stockade gates were thrown wide . Jon Snow raised his hand and lowered it, and his black ranks parted right and left, clearing a path to the Wall, where Dolorous Edd Tollett pushed open the iron gate. Come, urged Melisandre . Come to the light … or run back to the darkness . In the pit below her, the fire was crackling . If you choose life, come to me. And they came . Slowly at first, some limping or leaning on their fellows, the captives began to emerge from their rough-hewn pen . If you would eat, come to me, Jon thought . If you would not freeze or starve, submit . Hesitant, wary of some trap, the first few prisoners edged across the planks and through the ring of the stakes, toward Melisandre and the Wall . More followed, when they saw that no harm had come to those who went before . Then more, until it was a steady stream . Queen ' s men in studded jacks and halfhelms handed each passing man, woman, or child a piece of white weirwood: a stick, a splintered branch as pale as broken bone, a spray of blood-red leaves . A piece of the old gods to feed the new . Jon flexed the fingers of his sword hand. The heat from the fire pit was palpable even at a distance; for the wildlings, it had to be blistering . He saw men cringing as they neared the flames, heard children cry . A few turned for the forest . He watched a young woman stumble away with a child on either hand . Every few steps she looked back to make certain no one was coming after them, and when she neared the trees she broke into a run . One greybeard took the weirwood branch they handed him and used it as a weapon, laying about with it until the queen ' s men converged on him with spears . The others had to step around his body, until Ser Corliss had it thrown in the fire . More of the free folk chose the woods after that—one in ten, perhaps. But most came on . Behind them was only cold and death . Ahead was hope . They came on, clutching their scraps of wood until the time came to feed them to the flames . R ' hllor was a jealous deity, ever hungry . So the new god devoured the corpse of the old, and cast gigantic shadows of Stannis and Melisandre upon the Wall, black against the ruddy red reflections on the ice. Sigorn was the first to kneel before the king . The new Magnar of Thenn was a younger, shorter version of his father—lean, balding, clad in bronze greaves and a leather shirt sewn with bronze scales . Next came Rattleshirt in clattering armor made of bones and boiled leather, his helm a giant ' s skull . Under the bones lurked a ruined and wretched creature with cracked brown teeth and a yellow tinge to the whites of his eyes . A small, malicious, treacherous man, as stupid as he is cruel . Jon did not believe for a moment that he would keep faith . He wondered what Val was feeling as she watched him kneel, forgiven. Lesser leaders followed . Two clan chiefs of the Hornfoot men, whose feet were black and hard . An old wisewoman revered by the peoples of the Milkwater . A scrawny dark-eyed boy of two-and-ten, the son of Alfyn Crowkiller . Halleck, brother to Harma Dogshead, with her pigs . Each took a knee before the king. It is too cold for this mummer ' s show, thought Jon . The free folk despise kneelers, he had warned Stannis . Let them keep their pride, and they will love you better . His Grace would not listen . He said, It is swords I need from them, not kisses. Having knelt, the wildlings shuffled past the ranks of the black brothers to the gate . Jon had detailed Horse and Satin and half a dozen others to lead them through the Wall with torches . On the far side, bowls of hot onion soup awaited them, and chunks of black bread and sausage . Clothes as well: cloaks, breeches, boots, tunics, good leather gloves . They would sleep on piles of clean straw, with fires blazing to keep the chill of night at bay . This king was nothing if not methodical . Soon or late, however, Tormund Giantsbane would assault the Wall again, and when that hour came Jon wondered whose side Stannis ' s new-made subjects would choose . You can give them land and mercy, but the free folk choose their own kings, and it was Mance they chose, not you. Bowen Marsh edged his mount up next to Jon ' s . " This is a day I never thought to see . " The Lord Steward had thinned notably since suffering a head wound at the Bridge of Skulls . Part of one ear was gone . He no longer looks much like a pomegranate, Jon thought . Marsh said, " We bled to stop the wildlings at the Gorge . Good men were slain there, friends and brothers . For what? " " The realm will curse us all for this, " declared Ser Alliser Thorne in a venomous tone . " Every honest man in Westeros will turn his head and spit at the mention of the Night ' s Watch . " What would you know of honest men? " Quiet in the ranks . " Ser Alliser had grown more circumspect since Lord Janos had lost his head, but the malice was still there . Jon had toyed with the idea of giving him the command Slynt had refused, but he wanted the man close . He was always the more dangerous of the two . Instead he had dispatched a grizzled steward from the Shadow Tower to take command at Greyguard. He hoped the two new garrisons would make a difference . The Watch can make the free folk bleed, but in the end we cannot hope to stop them . Giving Mance Rayder to the fire did not change the truth of that . We are still too few and they are still too many, and without rangers, we ' re good as blind . I have to send men out . But if I do, will they come back again? The tunnel through the Wall was narrow and twisting, and many of the wildlings were old or ill or wounded, so the going was painfully slow . By the time the last of them had bent the knee, night had fallen . The pit fire was burning low, and the king ' s shadow on the Wall had shrunk to a quarter of its former height . Jon Snow could see his breath in the air . Cold, he thought, and getting colder . This mummer ' s show has gone on long enough. Two score captives lingered by the stockade . Four giants were among them, massive hairy creatures with sloped shoulders, legs as large as tree trunks, and huge splayed feet . Big as they were, they might still have passed through the Wall, but one would not leave his mammoth, and the others would not leave him . The rest of those who remained were all of human stature . Some were dead and some were dying; more were their kin or close companions, unwilling to abandon them even for a bowl of onion soup. Some shivering, some too numb to shiver, they listened as the king ' s voice rumbled off the Wall . " You are free to go, " Stannis told them . " Tell your people what you witnessed . Tell them that you saw the true king, and that they are welcome in his realm, so long as they keep his peace . Elsewise, they had best flee or hide . I will brook no further attacks upon my Wall . " " One realm, one god, one king! " cried Lady Melisandre. The queen ' s men took up the cry, beating the butts of their spears against their shields . " One realm, one god, one king! STANNIS! STANNIS! ONE REALM, ONE GOD, ONE KING! " Val did not join the chant, he saw . Nor did the brothers of the Night ' s Watch . During the tumult the few remaining wildlings melted into the trees . The giants were the last to go, two riding on the back of a mammoth, the other two afoot . Only the dead were left behind . Jon watched Stannis descend from the platform, with Melisandre by his side . His red shadow . She never leaves his side for long . The king ' s honor guard fell in around them—Ser Godry, Ser Clayton, and a dozen other knights, queen ' s men all . Moonlight shimmered on their armor and the wind whipped at their cloaks . Jon told Marsh, [BOS] Lord Steward, break up that stockade for firewood and throw the corpses in the flames . [EOS]  " As my lord commands . " Marsh barked out orders, and a swarm of his stewards broke from ranks to attack the wooden walls . The Lord Steward watched them, frowning . " These wildlings … do you think they will keep faith, my lord? " " Some will . Not all . We have our cowards and our knaves, our weaklings and our fools, as do they . " " Our vows … we are sworn to protect the realm … " Jon pointed out [BOS] Once the free folk are settled in the Gift, they will become part of the realm, These are desperate days, and like to grow more desperate . We have seen the face of our real foe, a dead white face with bright blue eyes . The free folk have seen that face as well . Stannis is not wrong in this . We must make common cause with the wildlings . [EOS]  " Common cause against a common foe, I could agree with that, " said Bowen Marsh, " but that does not mean we should allow tens of thousands of half-starved savages through the Wall . Let them return to their villages and fight the Others there, whilst we seal the gates . It will not be difficult, Othell tells me . We need only fill the tunnels with chunks of stone and pour water through the murder holes . The Wall does the rest . The cold, the weight … in a moon ' s turn, it will be as if no gate had ever been . Any foe would need to hack his way through . " " Or climb . " " Unlikely, " said Bowen Marsh . " These are not raiders, out to steal a wife and some plunder . Tormund will have old women with him, children, herds of sheep and goats, even mammoths . He needs a gate, and only three of those remain . And if he should send climbers up, well, defending against climbers is as simple as spearing fish in a kettle . " Fish never climb out of the kettle and shove a spear through your belly . Jon had climbed the Wall himself. Marsh went on . " Mance Rayder ' s bowmen must have loosed ten thousand arrows at us, judging from the number of spent shafts we ' ve gathered up . Fewer than a hundred reached our men atop the Wall, most of those lifted by some errant gust of wind . Red Alyn of the Rosewood was the only man to die up there, and it was his fall that killed him, not the arrow that pricked his leg . Donal Noye died to hold the gate . A gallant act, yes … but if the gate had been sealed, our brave armorer might still be with us . Whether we face a hundred foes or a hundred thousand, so long as we ' re atop the Wall and they ' re below, they cannot do us harm . " He ' s not wrong . Mance Rayder ' s host had broken against the Wall like a wave upon a stony shore, though the defenders were no more than a handful of old men, green boys, and cripples . Yet what Bowen was suggesting went against all of Jon ' s instincts . " If we seal the gates, we cannot send out rangers, " he pointed out . " We will be as good as blind . " " Lord Mormont ' s last ranging cost the Watch a quarter of its men, my lord . We need to conserve what strength remains us . Every death diminishes us, and we are stretched so thin … Take the high ground and win the battle, my uncle used to say . No ground is higher than the Wall, Lord Commander . " " Stannis promises land, food, and justice to any wildlings who bend the knee . He will never permit us to seal the gates . " Marsh hesitated . " Lord Snow, I am not one to bear tales, but there has been talk that you are becoming too … too friendly with Lord Stannis . Some even suggest that you are … a … " A rebel and a turncloak, aye, and a bastard and a warg as well . Janos Slynt might be gone, but his lies lingered . " I know what they say . " Jon had heard the whispers, had seen men turn away when he crossed the yard . " What would they have me do, take up swords against Stannis and the wildlings both? His Grace has thrice the fighting men we do, and is our guest besides . The laws of hospitality protect him . And we owe him and his a debt . " " Lord Stannis helped us when we needed help, " Marsh said doggedly, " but he is still a rebel, and his cause is doomed . As doomed as we ' ll be if the Iron Throne marks us down as traitors . We must be certain that we do not choose the losing side . " It is not my intent to choose any side, said Jon, but I am not as certain of the outcome of this war as you seem to be, my lord . Not with Lord Tywin dead . If the tales coming up the kingsroad could be believed, the King ' s Hand had been murdered by his dwarf son whilst sitting on a privy . Jon had known Tyrion Lannister, briefly . He took my hand and named me friend . It was hard to believe the little man had it in him to murder his own sire, but the fact of Lord Tywin ' s demise seemed to be beyond doubt . The lion in King ' s Landing is a cub, and the Iron Throne has been known to cut grown men to ribbons. " A boy he may be, my lord, but … King Robert was well loved, and most men still accept that Tommen is his son . The more they see of Lord Stannis the less they love him, and fewer still are fond of Lady Melisandre with her fires and this grim red god of hers . They complain . " " They complained about Lord Commander Mormont too . Men love to complain about their wives and lords, he told me once . Those without wives complain twice as much about their lords . " Jon Snow glanced toward the stockade . Two walls were down, a third falling fast . " I will leave you to finish here, Bowen . Make certain every corpse is burned . Thank you for your counsel . I promise you, I will think on all you ' ve said . " Smoke and drifting ash still lingered in the air about the pit as Jon trotted back to the gate . There he dismounted, to walk his garron through the ice to the south side . Dolorous Edd went before him with a torch . Its flames licked the ceiling, so cold tears trickled down upon them with every step. " It was a relief to see that horn burn, my lord, " Edd said . " Just last night I dreamt I was pissing off the Wall when someone decided to give the horn a toot . Not that I ' m complaining . It was better than my old dream, where Harma Dogshead was feeding me to her pigs . " Jon said [BOS] Harma ' s dead, [EOS]  " But not the pigs . They look at me the way Slayer used to look at ham . Not to say that the wildlings mean us harm . Aye, we hacked their gods apart and made them burn the pieces, but we gave them onion soup . What ' s a god compared to a nice bowl of onion soup? I could do with one myself . " The odors of smoke and burned flesh still clung to Jon ' s blacks . He knew he had to eat, but it was company he craved, not food . A cup of wine with Maester Aemon, some quiet words with Sam, a few laughs with Pyp and Grenn and Toad . Aemon and Sam were gone, though, and his other friends … " I will take supper with the men this evening . " " Boiled beef and beets . " Dolorous Edd always seemed to know what was cooking . " Hobb says he ' s out of horseradish, though . What good is boiled beef without horseradish? " Since the wildlings had burned the old common hall, the men of the Night ' s Watch took their meals in the stone cellar below the armory, a cavernous space divided by two rows of square stone pillars, with barrel-vaulted ceilings and great casks of wine and ale along the walls . When Jon entered, four builders were playing at tiles at the table nearest the steps . Closer to the fire sat a group of rangers and a few king ' s men, talking quietly. The younger men were gathered at another table, where Pyp had stabbed a turnip with his knife . " The night is dark and full of turnips, " he announced in a solemn voice . " Let us all pray for venison, my children, with some onions and a bit of tasty gravy . " His friends laughed—Grenn, Toad, Satin, the whole lot of them. Jon Snow did not join the laughter [BOS] Making mock of another man ' s prayer is fool ' s work, Pyp . And dangerous . [EOS]  " If the red god ' s offended, let him strike me down . " All the smiles had died . " It was the priestess we were laughing at, " said Satin, a lithe and pretty youth who had once been a whore in Oldtown . " We were only having a jape, my lord . " " You have your gods and she has hers . Leave her be . " " She won ' t let our gods be, " argued Toad . " She calls the Seven false gods, m ' lord . The old gods too . She made the wildlings burn weirwood branches . You saw . " " Lady Melisandre is not part of my command . You are . I won ' t have bad blood between the king ' s men and my own . " Pyp laid a hand on Toad ' s arm . " Croak no more, brave Toad, for our Great Lord Snow has spoken . " Pyp hopped to his feet and gave Jon a mocking bow . " I beg pardon . Henceforth, I shall not even waggle my ears save by your lordship ' s lordly leave . " He thinks this is all some game . Jon wanted to shake some sense into him . " Waggle your ears all you like . It ' s your tongue waggling that makes the trouble . " I ' ll see that he ' s more careful, Grenn promised, and I ' ll clout him if he ' s not . He hesitated . My lord, will you sup with us? Owen, shove over and make room for Jon. Jon wanted nothing more . No, he had to tell himself, those days are gone . The realization twisted in his belly like a knife . They had chosen him to rule . The Wall was his, and their lives were his as well . A lord may love the men that he commands, he could hear his lord father saying, but he cannot be a friend to them . One day he may need to sit in judgment on them, or send them forth to die . " Another day, " the lord commander lied . " Edd, best see to your own supper . I have work to finish . " The outside air seemed even colder than before . Across the castle, he could see candlelight shining from the windows of the King ' s Tower . Val stood on the tower roof, gazing up at the Wall . Stannis kept her closely penned in rooms above his own, but he did allow her to walk the battlements for exercise . She looks lonely, Jon thought . Lonely, and lovely . Ygritte had been pretty in her own way, with her red hair kissed by fire, but it was her smile that made her face come alive . Val did not need to smile; she would have turned men ' s heads in any court in the wide world. All the same, the wildling princess was not beloved of her gaolers . She scorned them all as " kneelers, " and had thrice attempted to escape . When one man-at-arms grew careless in her presence she had snatched his dagger from its sheath and stabbed him in the neck . Another inch to the left and he might have died. Lonely and lovely and lethal, Jon Snow reflected, and I might have had her . Her, and Winterfell, and my lord father ' s name . Instead he had chosen a black cloak and a wall of ice . Instead he had chosen honor . A bastard ' s sort of honor. The Wall loomed on his right as he crossed the yard . Its high ice glimmered palely, but down below all was shadow . At the gate a dim orange glow shone through the bars where the guards had taken refuge from the wind . Jon could hear the creak of chains as the winch cage swung and scraped against the ice . Up top, the sentries would be huddling in the warming shed around a brazier, shouting to be heard above the wind . Or else they would have given up the effort, and each man would be sunk in his own pool of silence . I should be walking the ice . The Wall is mine. He was walking beneath the shell of the Lord Commander ' s Tower, past the spot where Ygritte had died in his arms, when Ghost appeared beside him, his warm breath steaming in the cold . In the moonlight, his red eyes glowed like pools of fire . The taste of hot blood filled Jon ' s mouth, and he knew that Ghost had killed that night . No, he thought . I am a man, not a wolf . He rubbed his mouth with the back of a gloved hand and spat. Clydas still occupied the rooms beneath the rookery . At Jon ' s knock, he came shuffling, a taper in his hand, to open the door a crack . " Do I intrude? " asked Jon. " Not at all . " Clydas opened the door wider . " I was mulling wine . Will my lord take a cup? " " With pleasure . " His hands were stiff from cold . He pulled off his gloves and flexed his fingers. Clydas returned to the hearth to stir the wine . He ' s sixty if he ' s a day . An old man . He only seemed young compared with Aemon . Short and round, he had the dim pink eyes of some nocturnal creature . A few white hairs clung to his scalp . When Clydas poured, Jon held the cup with both hands, sniffed the spices, swallowed . The warmth spread through his chest . He drank again, long and deep, to wash the taste of blood from his mouth. " The queen ' s men are saying that the King-Beyond-the-Wall died craven . That he cried for mercy and denied he was a king . " Jon raised his cup [BOS] He did . Lightbringer was brighter than I ' d ever seen it . As bright as the sun . To Stannis Baratheon and his magic sword . [EOS] The wine was bitter in his mouth. " His Grace is not an easy man . Few are, who wear a crown . Many good men have been bad kings, Maester Aemon used to say, and some bad men have been good kings . " " He would know . " Aemon Targaryen had seen nine kings upon the Iron Throne . He had been a king ' s son, a king ' s brother, a king ' s uncle . " I looked at that book Maester Aemon left me . The Jade Compendium . The pages that told of Azor Ahai . Lightbringer was his sword . Tempered with his wife ' s blood if Votar can be believed . Thereafter Lightbringer was never cold to the touch, but warm as Nissa Nissa had been warm . In battle the blade burned fiery hot . Once Azor Ahai fought a monster . When he thrust the sword through the belly of the beast, its blood began to boil . Smoke and steam poured from its mouth, its eyes melted and dribbled down its cheeks, and its body burst into flame . " Clydas blinked . " A sword that makes its own heat … " " … would be a fine thing on the Wall . " Jon put aside his wine cup and drew on his black moleskin gloves . " A pity that the sword that Stannis wields is cold . I ' ll be curious to see how his Lightbringer behaves in battle . Thank you for the wine . Ghost, with me . " Jon Snow raised the hood of his cloak and pulled at the door . The white wolf followed him back into the night. The armory was dark and silent . Jon nodded to the guards before making his way past the silent racks of spears to his rooms . He hung his sword belt from a peg beside the door and his cloak from another . When he peeled off his gloves, his hands were stiff and cold . It took him a long while to get the candles lit . Ghost curled up on his rug and went to sleep, but Jon could not rest yet . The scarred pinewood table was covered with maps of the Wall and the lands beyond, a roster of rangers, and a letter from the Shadow Tower written in Ser Denys Mallister ' s flowing hand. He read the letter from the Shadow Tower again, sharpened a quill, and unstoppered a pot of thick black ink . He wrote two letters, the first to Ser Denys, the second to Cotter Pyke . Both of them had been hounding him for more men . Halder and Toad he dispatched west to the Shadow Tower, Grenn and Pyp to Eastwatch-by-the-Sea . The ink would not flow properly, and all his words seemed curt and crude and clumsy, yet he persisted. When he finally put the quill down, the room was dim and chilly, and he could feel its walls closing in . Perched above the window, the Old Bear ' s raven peered down at him with shrewd black eyes . My last friend, Jon thought ruefully . And I had best outlive you, or you ' ll eat my face as well . Ghost did not count . Ghost was closer than a friend . Ghost was part of him. Jon rose and climbed the steps to the narrow bed that had once been Donal Noye ' s . This is my lot, he realized as he undressed, from now until the end of my days. Careful of the rats, my lord . Dolorous Edd led Jon down the steps, a lantern in one hand . They make an awful squeal if you step on them . My mother used to make a similar sound when I was a boy . She must have had some rat in her, now that I think of it . Brown hair, beady little eyes, liked cheese . Might be she had a tail too, I never looked to see. All of Castle Black was connected underground by a maze of tunnels that the brothers called the wormways . It was dark and gloomy underneath the earth, so the wormways were little used in summer, but when the winter winds began to blow and the snows began to fall, the tunnels became the quickest way to move about the castle . The stewards were making use of them already . Jon saw candles burning in several wall niches as they made their way along the tunnel, their footsteps echoing ahead of them. Bowen Marsh was waiting at a junction where four wormways met . With him he had Wick Whittlestick, tall and skinny as a spear . " These are the counts from three turns ago, " Marsh told Jon, offering him a thick sheaf of papers, " for comparison with our present stores . Shall we start with the granaries? " They moved through the grey gloom beneath the earth . Each storeroom had a solid oaken door closed with an iron padlock as big as a supper plate . Jon asked [BOS] Is pilferage a problem? [EOS]  " Not as yet, " said Bowen Marsh . " Once winter comes, though, your lordship might be wise to post guards down here . " Wick Whittlestick wore the keys on a ring about his neck . They all looked alike to Jon, yet somehow Wick found the right one for every door . Once inside, he would take a fist-sized chunk of chalk from his pouch and mark each cask and sack and barrel as he counted them while Marsh compared the new count to the old. In the granaries were oats and wheat and barley, and barrels of coarse ground flour . In the root cellars strings of onions and garlic dangled from the rafters, and bags of carrots, parsnips, radishes, and white and yellow turnips filled the shelves . One storeroom held wheels of cheese so large it took two men to move them . In the next, casks of salt beef, salt pork, salt mutton, and salt cod were stacked ten feet high . Three hundred hams and three thousand long black sausages hung from ceiling beams below the smokehouse . In the spice locker they found peppercorns, cloves, and cinnamon, mustard seeds, coriander, sage and clary sage and parsley, blocks of salt . Elsewhere were casks of apples and pears, dried peas, dried figs, bags of walnuts, bags of chestnuts, bags of almonds, planks of dry smoked salmon, clay jars packed with olives in oil and sealed with wax . One storeroom offered potted hare, haunch of deer in honey, pickled cabbage, pickled beets, pickled onions, pickled eggs, and pickled herring. As they moved from one vault to another, the wormways seemed to grow colder . Before long Jon could see their breath frosting in the lantern light . " We ' re beneath the Wall . " " And soon inside it, " said Marsh . " The meat won ' t spoil in the cold . For long storage, it ' s better than salting . " The next door was made of rusty iron . Behind it was a flight of wooden steps . Dolorous Edd led the way with his lantern . Up top they found a tunnel as long as Winterfell ' s great hall though no wider than the wormways . The walls were ice, bristling with iron hooks . From each hook hung a carcass: skinned deer and elk, sides of beef, huge sows swinging from the ceiling, headless sheep and goats, even horse and bear . Hoarfrost covered everything. As they did their count, Jon peeled the glove off his left hand and touched the nearest haunch of venison . He could feel his fingers sticking, and when he pulled them back he lost a bit of skin . His fingertips were numb . What did you expect? There ' s a mountain of ice above your head, more tons than even Bowen Marsh could count . Even so, the room felt colder than it should. " It is worse than I feared, my lord, " Marsh announced when he was done . He sounded gloomier than Dolorous Edd. Jon had just been thinking that all the meat in the world surrounded them . You know nothing, Jon Snow [BOS] How so? This seems a deal of food to me . [EOS]  " It was a long summer . The harvests were bountiful, the lords generous . We had enough laid by to see us through three years of winter . Four, with a bit of scrimping . Now, though, if we must go on feeding all these king ' s men and queen ' s men and wildlings … Mole ' s Town alone has a thousand useless mouths, and still they come . Three more turned up yesterday at the gates, a dozen the day before . It cannot go on . Settling them on the Gift, that ' s well and good, but it is too late to plant crops . We ' ll be down to turnips and pease porridge before the year is out . After that we ' ll be drinking the blood of our own horses . " " Yum, " declared Dolorous Edd . " Nothing beats a hot cup of horse blood on a cold night . I like mine with a pinch of cinnamon sprinkled on top . " The Lord Steward paid him no mind . " There will be sickness too, " he went on, " bleeding gums and loose teeth . Maester Aemon used to say that lime juice and fresh meat would remedy that, but our limes were gone a year ago and we do not have enough fodder to keep herds afoot for fresh meat . We should butcher all but a few breeding pairs . It ' s past time . In winters past, food could be brought up the kingsroad from the south, but with the war … it is still autumn, I know, but I would advise we go on winter rations nonetheless, if it please my lord . " The men will love that . " If we must . We ' ll cut each man ' s portion by a quarter . " If my brothers are complaining of me now, what will they say when they ' re eating snow and acorn paste? " That will help, my lord . " The Lord Steward ' s tone made it plain that he did not think that it would help enough. Dolorous Edd said, " Now I understand why King Stannis let the wildlings through the Wall . He means for us to eat them . " Jon had to smile [BOS] It will not come to that . [EOS]  " Oh, good, " said Edd . " They look a stringy lot, and my teeth are not as sharp as when I was younger . " " If we had sufficient coin, we could buy food from the south and bring it in by ship, " the Lord Steward said. We could, thought Jon, if we had the gold, and someone willing to sell us food . Both of those were lacking . Our best hope may be the Eyrie . The Vale of Arryn was famously fertile and had gone untouched during the fighting . Jon wondered how Lady Catelyn ' s sister would feel about feeding Ned Stark ' s bastard . As a boy, he often felt as if the lady grudged him every bite. " We can always hunt if need be, " Wick Whittlestick put in . " There ' s still game in the woods . " " And wildlings, and darker things, " said Marsh . " I would not send out hunters, my lord . I would not . " No . You would close our gates forever and seal them up with stone and ice . Half of Castle Black agreed with the Lord Steward ' s views, he knew . The other half heaped scorn on them . " Seal our gates and plant your fat black arses on the Wall, aye, and the free folk ' ll come swarming o ' er the Bridge o ' Skulls or through some gate you thought you ' d sealed five hundred years ago, " the old forester Dywen had declared loudly over supper, two nights past . " We don ' t have the men to watch a hundred leagues o ' Wall . Tormund Giantsbutt and the bloody Weeper knows it too . Ever see a duck frozen in a pond, with his feet in the ice? It works the same for crows . " Most rangers echoed Dywen, whilst the stewards and builders inclined toward Bowen Marsh. But that was a quandary for another day . Here and now, the problem was food . Jon said [BOS] We cannot leave King Stannis and his men to starve, even if we wished to, If need be, he could simply take all this at swordpoint . We do not have the men to stop them . The wildlings must be fed as well . [EOS]  " How, my lord? " asked Bowen Marsh. Would that I knew . " We will find a way . " By the time they returned to the surface, the shadows of the afternoon were growing long . Clouds streaked the sky like tattered banners, grey and white and torn . The yard outside the armory was empty, but inside Jon found the king ' s squire awaiting him . Devan was a skinny lad of some twelve years, brown of hair and eye . They found him frozen by the forge, hardly daring to move as Ghost sniffed him up and down . He won ' t hurt you, Jon said, but the boy flinched at the sound of his voice, and that sudden motion made the direwolf bare his teeth . No! Jon said . Ghost, leave him be . Away . The wolf slunk back to his ox bone, silence on four feet. Devan looked as pale as Ghost, his face damp with perspiration . " M-my lord . His Grace c-commands your presence . " The boy was clad in Baratheon gold and black, with the flaming heart of a queen ' s man sewn above his own. " You mean requests, " said Dolorous Edd . " His Grace requests the presence of the lord commander . That ' s how I ' d say it . " " Leave it be, Edd . " Jon was in no mood for such squabbles. " Sir Richard and Ser Justin have returned, " said Devan . " Will you come, my lord? " The wrong-way rangers . Massey and Horpe had ridden south, not north . Whatever they had learned did not concern the Night ' s Watch, but Jon was curious all the same . " If it would please His Grace . " He followed the young squire back across the yard . Ghost padded after them until Jon said, " No . Stay! " Instead the direwolf ran off. In the King ' s Tower, Jon was stripped of his weapons and admitted to the royal presence . The solar was hot and crowded . Stannis and his captains were gathered over the map of the north . The wrong-way rangers were amongst them . Sigorn was there as well, the young Magnar of Thenn, clad in a leather hauberk sewn with bronze scales . Rattleshirt sat scratching at the manacle on his wrist with a cracked yellow fingernail . Brown stubble covered his sunken cheeks and receding chin, and strands of dirty hair hung across his eyes . Here he comes, he said when he saw Jon, the brave boy who slew Mance Rayder when he was caged and bound . The big square-cut gem that adorned his iron cuff glimmered redly . Do you like my ruby, Snow? A token o ' love from Lady Red. Jon ignored him and took a knee . " Your Grace, " announced the squire Devan, " I ' ve brought Lord Snow . " " I can see that . Lord Commander . You know my knights and captains, I believe . " " I have that honor . " He had made it a point to learn all he could of the men around the king . Queen ' s men, all . It struck Jon as odd that there were no king ' s men about the king, but that seemed to be the way of it . The king ' s men had incurred Stannis ' s ire on Dragonstone if the talk Jon heard was true. " There is wine . Or water boiled with lemons . " " Thank you, but no . " " As you wish . I have a gift for you, Lord Snow . " The king waved a hand at Rattleshirt . " Him . " Lady Melisandre smiled . " You did say you wanted men, Lord Snow . I believe our Lord of Bones still qualifies . " Jon was aghast [BOS] Your Grace, this man cannot be trusted . If I keep him here, someone will slit his throat for him . If I send him ranging, he ' ll just go back over to the wildlings . [EOS]  " Not me . I ' m done with those bloody fools . " Rattleshirt tapped the ruby on his wrist . " Ask your red witch, bastard . " Melisandre spoke softly in a strange tongue . The ruby at her throat throbbed slowly, and Jon saw that the smaller stone on Rattleshirt ' s wrist was brightening and darkening as well . " So long as he wears the gem he is bound to me, blood and soul, " the red priestess said . " This man will serve you faithfully . The flames do not lie, Lord Snow . " Perhaps not, Jon thought, but you do. " I ' ll range for you, bastard, " Rattleshirt declared . " I ' ll give you sage counsel or sing you pretty songs, as you prefer . I ' ll even fight for you . Just don ' t ask me to wear your cloak . " You are not worthy of one, Jon thought, but he held his tongue . No good would come of squabbling before the king. King Stannis said, " Lord Snow, tell me of Mors Umber . " The Night ' s Watch takes no part, Jon thought, but another voice within him said, Words are not swords . " The elder of the Greatjon ' s uncles . Crowfood, they call him . A crow once took him for dead and pecked out his eye . He caught the bird in his fist and bit its head off . When Mors was young he was a fearsome fighter . His sons died on the Trident, his wife in childbed . His only daughter was carried off by wildlings thirty years ago . " " That ' s why he wants the head, " said Harwood Fell. " Can this man Mors be trusted? " asked Stannis. Has Mors Umber bent the knee? " Your Grace should have him swear an oath before his heart tree . " Godry the Giantslayer guffawed . " I had forgotten that you northmen worship trees . " " What sort of god lets himself be pissed upon by dogs? " asked Farring ' s crony Clayton Suggs. Jon chose to ignore them [BOS] Your Grace, might I know if the Umbers have declared for you? [EOS]  " Half of them, and only if I meet this Crowfood ' s price, " said Stannis, in an irritated tone . " He wants Mance Rayder ' s skull for a drinking cup, and he wants a pardon for his brother, who has ridden south to join Bolton . Whoresbane, he ' s called . " Ser Godry was amused by that as well . " What names these northmen have! Did this one bite the head off some whore? " Jon regarded him coolly . " You might say so . A whore who tried to rob him, fifty years ago in Oldtown . " Odd as it might seem, old Hoarfrost Umber had once believed his youngest son had the makings of a maester . Mors loved to boast about the crow who took his eye, but Hother ' s tale was only told in whispers … most like because the whore he ' d disemboweled had been a man . " Have other lords declared for Bolton too? " The red priestess slid closer to the king . " I saw a town with wooden walls and wooden streets, filled with men . Banners flew above its walls: a moose, a battle-axe, three pine trees, longaxes crossed beneath a crown, a horse ' s head with fiery eyes . " " Hornwood, Cerwyn, Tallhart, Ryswell, and Dustin, " supplied Ser Clayton Suggs . " Traitors, all . Lapdogs of the Lannisters . " Jon informed him [BOS] The Ryswells and Dustins are tied to House Bolton by marriage, These others have lost their lords in the fighting . I do not know who leads them now . Crowfood is no lapdog, though . Your Grace would do well to accept his terms . [EOS]  Stannis ground his teeth . " He informs me that Umber will not fight Umber, for any cause . " Jon was not surprised [BOS] If it comes to swords, see where Hother ' s banner flies and put Mors on the other end of the line . [EOS]  The Giantslayer disagreed . " You would make His Grace look weak . I say, show our strength . Burn Last Hearth to the ground and ride to war with Crowfood ' s head mounted on a spear, as a lesson to the next lord who presumes to offer half his homage . " " A fine plan if what you want is every hand in the north raised against you . Half is more than none . The Umbers have no love for the Boltons . If Whoresbane has joined the Bastard, it can only be because the Lannisters hold the Greatjon captive . " " That is his pretext, not his reason, " declared Ser Godry . " If the nephew dies in chains, these uncles can claim his lands and lordship for themselves . " " The Greatjon has sons and daughters both . In the north the children of a man ' s body still come before his uncles, ser . " " Unless they die . Dead children come last everywhere . " " Suggest that in the hearing of Mors Umber, Ser Godry, and you will learn more of death than you might wish . " " I have slain a giant, boy . Why should I fear some flea-ridden northman who paints one on his shield? " " The giant was running away . Mors won ' t be . " The big knight flushed . " You have a bold tongue in the king ' s solar, boy . In the yard you sang a different song . " " Oh, leave off, Godry, " said Ser Justin Massey, a loose-limbed, fleshy knight with a ready smile and a mop of flaxen hair . Massey had been one of the wrong-way rangers . " We all know what a big giant sword you have, I ' m sure . No need for you to wave it in our faces yet again . " " The only thing waving here is your tongue, Massey . " " Be quiet, " Stannis snapped . " Lord Snow, attend me . I have lingered here in the hopes that the wildlings would be fool enough to mount another attack upon the Wall . As they will not oblige me, it is time I dealt with my other foes . " " I see . " Jon ' s tone was wary . What does he want of me? " I have no love for Lord Bolton or his son, but the Night ' s Watch cannot take up arms against them . Our vows prohibit— " " I know all about your vows . Spare me your rectitude, Lord Snow, I have strength enough without you . I have a mind to march against the Dreadfort . " When he saw the shock on Jon ' s face, he smiled . " Does that surprise you? Good . What surprises one Snow may yet surprise another . The Bastard of Bolton has gone south, taking Hother Umber with him . On that Mors Umber and Arnolf Karstark are agreed . That can only mean a strike at Moat Cailin, to open the way for his lord father to return to the north . The bastard must think I am too busy with the wildlings to trouble him . Well and good . The boy has shown me his throat . I mean to rip it out . Roose Bolton may regain the north, but when he does he will find that his castle, herds, and harvest all belong to me . If I take the Dreadfort unawares— " Jon blurted [BOS] You won ' t, [EOS]  It was as if he whacked a wasps ' nest with a stick . One of the queen ' s men laughed, one spat, one muttered a curse, and the rest all tried to talk at once . " The boy has milkwater in his veins, " said Ser Godry the Giantslayer . And Lord Sweet huffed, " The craven sees an outlaw behind every blade of grass . " Stannis raised a hand for silence . " Explain your meaning . " Where to begin? Jon moved to the map . Candles had been placed at its corners to keep the hide from rolling up . A finger of warm wax was puddling out across the Bay of Seals, slow as a glacier . " To reach the Dreadfort, Your Grace must travel down the kingsroad past the Last River, turn south by east and cross the Lonely Hills . " He pointed . " Those are Umber lands, where they know every tree and every rock . The kingsroad runs along their western marches for a hundred leagues . Mors will cut your host to pieces unless you meet his terms and win him to your cause . " " Very well . Let us say I do that . " " That will bring you to the Dreadfort, " said Jon, " but unless your host can outmarch a raven or a line of beacon fires, the castle will know of your approach . It will be an easy thing for Ramsay Bolton to cut off your retreat and leave you far from the Wall, without food or refuge, surrounded by your foes . " " Only if he abandons his siege of Moat Cailin . " " Moat Cailin will fall before you ever reach the Dreadfort . Once Lord Roose has joined his strength to Ramsay ' s, they will have you outnumbered five to one . " " My brother won battles at worse odds . " " You assume Moat Cailin will fall quickly, Snow, " objected Justin Massey, " but the ironmen are doughty fighters, and I ' ve heard it said that the Moat has never been taken . " From the south . A small garrison in Moat Cailin can play havoc with any army coming up the causeway, but the ruins are vulnerable from the north and east . Jon turned back to Stannis . Sire, this is a bold stroke, but the risk— The Night ' s Watch takes no part . Baratheon or Bolton should be the same to me . If Roose Bolton should catch you beneath his walls with his main strength, it will be the end for all of you. " Risk is part of war, " declared Ser Richard Horpe, a lean knight with a ravaged face whose quilted doublet showed three death ' s-head moths on a field of ash and bone . " Every battle is a gamble, Snow . The man who does nothing also takes a risk . " " There are risks and risks, Ser Richard . This one … it is too much, too soon, too far away . I know the Dreadfort . It is a strong castle, all of stone, with thick walls and massive towers . With winter coming you will find it well provisioned . Centuries ago, House Bolton rose up against the King in the North, and Harlon Stark laid siege to the Dreadfort . It took him two years to starve them out . To have any hope of taking the castle, Your Grace would need siege engines, towers, battering rams … " " Siege towers can be raised if need be, " Stannis said . " Trees can be felled for rams if rams are required . Arnolf Karstark writes that fewer than fifty men remain at the Dreadfort, half of them servants . A strong castle weakly held is weak . " " Fifty men inside a castle are worth five hundred outside . " " That depends upon the men, " said Richard Horpe . " These will be greybeards and green boys, the men this bastard did not deem fit for battle . Our own men were blooded and tested on the Blackwater, and they are led by knights . " " You saw how we went through the wildlings . " Ser Justin pushed back a lock of flaxen hair . " The Karstarks have sworn to join us at the Dreadfort, and we will have our wildlings as well . Three hundred men of fighting age . Lord Harwood made a count as they were passing through the gate . Their women fight as well . " Stannis gave him a sour look . " Not for me, ser . I want no widows wailing in my wake . The women will remain here, with the old, the wounded, and the children . They will serve as hostages for the loyalty of their husbands and fathers . The wildling men will form my van . The Magnar will command them, with their own chiefs as serjeants . First, though, we must needs arm them . " He means to plunder our armory, Jon realized . Food and clothing, land and castles, now weapons . He draws me in deeper every day . Words might not be swords, but swords were swords . " I could find three hundred spears, " he said, reluctantly . " Helms as well, if you ' ll take them old and dinted and red with rust . " " Armor? " asked the Magnar . " Plate? Mail? " " When Donal Noye died we lost our armorer . " The rest Jon left unspoken . Give the wildlings mail and they ' ll be twice as great a danger to the realm. " Boiled leather will suffice, " said Ser Godry . " Once we ' ve tasted battle, the survivors can loot the dead . " The few who live that long . If Stannis placed the free folk in the van, most would perish quickly . " Drinking from Mance Rayder ' s skull may give Mors Umber pleasure, but seeing wildlings cross his lands will not . The free folk have been raiding the Umbers since the Dawn of Days, crossing the Bay of Seals for gold and sheep and women . One of those carried off was Crowfood ' s daughter . Your Grace, leave the wildlings here . Taking them will only serve to turn my lord father ' s bannermen against you . " " Your father ' s bannermen seem to have no liking for my cause in any case . I must assume they see me as … what was it that you called me, Lord Snow? Another doomed pretender? " Stannis stared at the map . For a long moment the only sound was the king grinding his teeth . " Leave me . All of you . Lord Snow, remain . " The brusque dismissal did not sit well with Justin Massey, but he had no choice but to smile and withdraw . Horpe followed him out, after giving Jon a measured look . Clayton Suggs drained his cup dry and muttered something to Harwood Fell that made the younger man laugh . Boy was part of it . Suggs was an upjumped hedge knight, as crude as he was strong . The last man to take his leave was Rattleshirt . At the door, he gave Jon a mocking bow, grinning through a mouthful of brown and broken teeth. All of you did not seem to include Lady Melisandre . The king ' s red shadow . Stannis called to Devan for more lemon water . When his cup was filled the king drank, and said, " Horpe and Massey aspire to your father ' s seat . Massey wants the wildling princess too . He once served my brother Robert as squire and acquired his appetite for female flesh . Horpe will take Val to wife if I command it, but it is battle he lusts for . As a squire he dreamed of a white cloak, but Cersei Lannister spoke against him and Robert passed him over . Perhaps rightly . Ser Richard is too fond of killing . Which would you have as Lord of Winterfell, Snow? The smiler or the slayer? " Jon said, [BOS] Winterfell belongs to my sister Sansa . [EOS]  " I have heard all I need to hear of Lady Lannister and her claim . " The king set the cup aside . " You could bring the north to me . Your father ' s bannermen would rally to the son of Eddard Stark . Even Lord Too-Fat-to-Sit-a-Horse . White Harbor would give me a ready source of supply and a secure base to which I could retreat at need . It is not too late to amend your folly, Snow . Take a knee and swear that bastard sword to me, and rise as Jon Stark, Lord of Winterfell and Warden of the North . " How many times will he make me say it? " My sword is sworn to the Night ' s Watch . " Stannis looked disgusted . " Your father was a stubborn man as well . Honor, he called it . Well, honor has its costs, as Lord Eddard learned to his sorrow . If it gives you any solace, Horpe and Massey are doomed to disappointment . I am more inclined to bestow Winterfell upon Arnolf Karstark . A good northman . " " A northman . " Better a Karstark than a Bolton or a Greyjoy, Jon told himself, but the thought gave him little solace . " The Karstarks abandoned my brother amongst his enemies . " " After your brother took off Lord Rickard ' s head . Arnolf was a thousand leagues away . He has Stark blood in him . The blood of Winterfell . " " No more than half the other Houses of the north . " " Those other Houses have not declared for me . " " Arnolf Karstark is an old man with a crooked back, and even in his youth he was never the fighter Lord Rickard was . The rigors of the campaign may well kill him . " " He has heirs, " Stannis snapped . " Two sons, six grandsons, some daughters . If Robert had fathered trueborn sons, many who are dead might still be living . " " Your Grace would do better with Mors Crowfood . " " The Dreadfort will be the proof of that . " " Then you mean to go ahead with this attack? " " Despite the counsel of the great Lord Snow? Aye . Horpe and Massey may be ambitious, but they are not wrong . I dare not sit idle whilst Roose Bolton ' s star waxes and mine wanes . I must strike and show the north that I am still a man to fear . " Jon said [BOS] The merman of Manderly was not amongst those banners Lady Melisandre saw in her fires, If you had White Harbor and Lord Wyman ' s knights … [EOS]  " If is a word for fools . We have had no word from Davos . It may be he never reached White Harbor . Arnolf Karstark writes that the storms have been fierce upon the narrow sea . Be that as it may . I have no time to grieve, nor wait upon the whims of Lord Too-Fat . I must consider White Harbor lost to me . Without a son of Winterfell to stand beside me, I can only hope to win the north by battle . That requires stealing a leaf from my brother ' s book . Not that Robert ever read one . I must deal my foes a mortal blow before they know that I am on them . " Jon realized that his words were wasted . Stannis would take the Dreadfort or die in the attempt . The Night ' s Watch takes no part, a voice said, but another replied, Stannis fights for the realm, the ironmen for thralls and plunder [BOS] Your Grace, I know where you might find more men . Give me the wildlings, and I will gladly tell you where and how . [EOS]  " I gave you Rattleshirt . Be content with him . " " I want them all . " " Some of your own Sworn Brothers would have me believe that you are half a wildling yourself . Is it true? " " To you they are only arrow fodder . I can make better use of them upon the Wall . Give them to me to do with as I will, and I ' ll show you where to find your victory … and men as well . " Stannis rubbed the back of his neck . " You haggle like a crone with a codfish, Lord Snow . Did Ned Stark father you on some fishwife? How many men? " " Two thousand . Perhaps three . " " Three thousand? What manner of men are these? " " Proud . Poor . Prickly where their honor is concerned but fierce fighters . " " This had best not be some bastard ' s trick . Will I trade three hundred fighters for three thousand? Aye, I will . I am not an utter fool . If I leave the girl with you as well, do I have your word that you will keep our princess closely? " She is not a princess . " As you wish, Your Grace . " " Do I need to make you swear an oath before a tree? " " No . " Was that a jape? With Stannis, it was hard to tell. " Done, then . Now, where are these men? " " You ' ll find them here . " Jon spread his burned hand across the map, west of the kingsroad and south of the Gift. " Those mountains? " Stannis grew suspicious . " I see no castles marked there . No roads, no towns, no villages . " " The map is not the land, my father often said . Men have lived in the high valleys and mountain meadows for thousands of years, ruled by their clan chiefs . Petty lords, you would call them, though they do not use such titles amongst themselves . Clan champions fight with huge two-handed greatswords, while the common men sling stones and batter one another with staffs of mountain ash . A quarrelsome folk, it must be said . When they are not fighting one another, they tend their herds, fish the Bay of Ice, and breed the hardiest mounts you ' ll ever ride . " " And they will fight for me, you believe? " " If you ask them . " " Why should I beg for what is owed me? " Jon pulled back his hand [BOS] Ask, I said, not beg . It is no good sending messages . Your Grace will need to go to them yourself . Eat their bread and salt, drink their ale, listen to their pipers, praise the beauty of their daughters and the courage of their sons, and you ' ll have their swords . The clans have not seen a king since Torrhen Stark bent his knee . Your coming does them honor . Command them to fight for you, and they will look at one another and say, ‘ Who is this man? He is no king of mine . ' [EOS]  " How many clans are you speaking of? " " Two score, small and large . Flint, Wull, Norrey, Liddle … win Old Flint and Big Bucket, the rest will follow . " " Big Bucket? " " The Wull . He has the biggest belly in the mountains, and the most men . The Wulls fish the Bay of Ice and warn their little ones that ironmen will carry them off if they don ' t behave . To reach them Your Grace must pass through the Norrey ' s lands, however . They live the nearest to the Gift and have always been good friends to the Watch . I could give you guides . " " Could? " Stannis missed little . " Or will? " " Will . You ' ll need them . And some sure-footed garrons too . The paths up there are little more than goat tracks . " " Goat tracks? " The king ' s eyes narrowed . " I speak of moving swiftly, and you waste my time with goat tracks? " " When the Young Dragon conquered Dorne, he used a goat track to bypass the Dornish watchtowers on the Boneway . " " I know that tale as well, but Daeron made too much of it in that vainglorious book of his . Ships won that war, not goat tracks . Oakenfist broke the Planky Town and swept halfway up the Greenblood whilst the main Dornish strength was engaged in the Prince ' s Pass . " Stannis drummed his fingers on the map . " These mountain lords will not hinder my passage? " " Only with feasts . Each will try to outdo the others with his hospitality . My lord father said he never ate half so well as when visiting the clans . " " For three thousand men, I suppose I can endure some pipes and porridge, " the king said, though his tone begrudged even that. Jon turned to Melisandre [BOS] My lady, fair warning . The old gods are strong in those mountains . The clansmen will not suffer insults to their heart trees . [EOS]  That seemed to amuse her . " Have no fear, Jon Snow, I will not trouble your mountain savages and their dark gods . My place is here with you and your brave brothers . " That was the last thing Jon Snow would have wanted, but before he could object, the king said, " Where would you have me lead these stalwarts if not against the Dreadfort? " Jon glanced down at the map . " Deepwood Motte . " He tapped it with a finger . " If Bolton means to fight the ironmen, so must you . Deepwood is a motte-and-bailey castle in the midst of thick forest, easy to creep up on unawares . A wooden castle, defended by an earthen dike and a palisade of logs . The going will be slower through the mountains, admittedly, but up there your host can move unseen, to emerge almost at the gates of Deepwood . " Stannis rubbed his jaw . " When Balon Greyjoy rose the first time, I beat the ironmen at sea, where they are fiercest . On land, taken unawares … aye . I have won a victory over the wildlings and their King-Beyond-the-Wall . If I can smash the ironmen as well, the north will know it has a king again . " And I will have a thousand wildlings, thought Jon, and no way to feed even half that number. His candle had guttered out in a pool of wax, but morning light was shining through the shutters of his window . Jon had fallen asleep over his work again . Books covered his table, tall stacks of them . He ' d fetched them up himself, after spending half the night searching through dusty vaults by lantern light . Sam was right, the books desperately needed to be sorted, listed, and put in order, but that was no task for stewards who could neither read nor write . It would need to wait for Sam ' s return. If he does return . Jon feared for Sam and Maester Aemon . Cotter Pyke had written from Eastwatch to report that the Storm Crow had sighted the wreckage of a galley along the coast of Skagos . Whether the broken ship was Blackbird, one of Stannis Baratheon ' s sellsails, or some passing trader, the crew of the Storm Crow had not been able to discern . I meant to send Gilly and the babe to safety . Did I send them to their graves instead? Last night ' s supper had congealed beside his elbow, scarce touched . Dolorous Edd had filled his trencher almost to overflowing to allow Three-Finger Hobb ' s infamous three-meat stew to soften the stale bread . The jest among the brothers was that the three meats were mutton, mutton, and mutton, but carrot, onion, and turnip would have been closer to the mark . A film of cold grease glistened atop the remains of the stew. Bowen Marsh had urged him to move into the Old Bear ' s former chambers in the King ' s Tower after Stannis vacated them, but Jon had declined . Moving into the king ' s chambers could too easily be taken to mean he did not expect the king to return. A strange listlessness had settled over Castle Black since Stannis had marched south, as if the free folk and the black brothers alike were holding their breath, waiting to see what would come . The yards and dining hall were empty more oft than not, the Lord Commander ' s Tower was a shell, the old common hall a pile of blackened timbers, and Hardin ' s Tower looked as if the next gust of wind would knock it over . The only sound of life that Jon could hear was the faint clash of swords coming from the yard outside the armory . Iron Emmett was shouting at Hop-Robin to keep his shield up . We had all best keep our shields up. Jon washed and dressed and left the armory, stopping in the yard outside just long enough to say a few words of encouragement to Hop-Robin and Emmett ' s other charges . He declined Ty ' s offer of a tail, as usual . He would have men enough about him; if it came to blood, two more would hardly matter . He did take Longclaw, though, and Ghost followed at his heels. By the time he reached the stable, Dolorous Edd had the lord commander ' s palfrey saddled and bridled and waiting for him . The wayns were forming up beneath Bowen Marsh ' s watchful eye . The Lord Steward was trotting down the column, pointing and fussing, his cheeks red from the cold . When he spied Jon, they reddened even more . " Lord Commander . Are you still intent on this … " " … folly? " finished Jon . " Please tell me you were not about to say folly, my lord . Yes, I am . We have been over this . Eastwatch wants more men . The Shadow Tower wants more men . Greyguard and Icemark as well, I have no doubt, and we have fourteen other castles still sitting empty, long leagues of Wall that remain unwatched and undefended . " Marsh pursed his lips . " Lord Commander Mormont— " Jon wheeled his horse around [BOS] —is dead . And not at wildling hands, but at the hands of his own Sworn Brothers, men he trusted . Neither you nor I can know what he would or would not have done in my place . Enough talk . Away . [EOS]  Dolorous Edd had heard the entire exchange . As Bowen Marsh trotted off, he nodded toward his back and said, " Pomegranates . All those seeds . A man could choke to death . I ' d sooner have a turnip . Never knew a turnip to do a man any harm . " It was at times like this that Jon missed Maester Aemon the most . Clydas tended to the ravens well enough, but he had not a tenth of Aemon Targaryen ' s knowledge or experience, and even less of his wisdom . Bowen was a good man in his way, but the wound he had taken at the Bridge of Skulls had hardened his attitudes, and the only song he ever sang now was his familiar refrain about sealing the gates . Othell Yarwyck was as stolid and unimaginative as he was taciturn, and the First Rangers seemed to die as quick as they were named . The Night ' s Watch has lost too many of its best men, Jon reflected, as the wagons began to move . The Old Bear, Qhorin Halfhand, Donal Noye, Jarmen Buckwell, my uncle … A light snow began to fall as the column made its way south along the kingsroad, the long line of wagons wending past fields and streams and wooded hillsides, with a dozen spearmen and a dozen archers riding escort . The last few trips had seen some ugliness at Mole ' s Town, a little pushing and shoving, some muttered curses, a lot of sullen looks . Bowen Marsh felt it best not to take chances, and for once he and Jon were agreed. The Lord Steward led the way . Jon rode a few yards back, Dolorous Edd Tollett at his side . Half a mile south of Castle Black, Edd urged his garron close to Jon ' s and said, " M ' lord? Look up there . The big drunkard on the hill . " The drunkard was an ash tree, twisted sideways by centuries of wind . And now it had a face . A solemn mouth, a broken branch for a nose, two eyes carved deep into the trunk, gazing north up the kingsroad, toward the castle and the Wall. The wildlings brought their gods with them after all . Jon was not surprised . Men do not give up their gods so easily . The whole pageant that Lady Melisandre had orchestrated beyond the Wall suddenly seemed as empty as a mummer ' s farce . " Looks a bit like you, Edd, " he said, trying to make light of it. " Aye, m ' lord . I don ' t have leaves growing out my nose, but elsewise … Lady Melisandre won ' t be happy . " " She ' s not like to see it . See that no one tells her . " " She sees things in those fires, though . " " Smoke and cinders . " " And people burning . Me, most like . With leaves up my nose . I always feared I ' d burn, but I was hoping to die first . " Jon glanced back at the face, wondering who had carved it . He had posted guards around Mole ' s Town, both to keep his crows away from the wildling women and to keep the free folk from slipping off southward to raid . Whoever had carved up the ash had eluded his sentries, plainly . And if one man could slip through the cordon, others could as well . I could double the guard again, he thought sourly . Waste twice as many men, men who might otherwise be walking the Wall. The wagons continued on their slow way south through frozen mud and blowing snow . A mile farther on, they came upon a second face, carved into a chestnut tree that grew beside an icy stream, where its eyes could watch the old plank bridge that spanned its flow . " Twice as much trouble, " announced Dolorous Edd. The chestnut was leafless and skeletal, but its bare brown limbs were not empty . On a low branch overhanging the stream a raven sat hunched, its feathers ruffled up against the cold . When it spied Jon it spread its wings and gave a scream . When he raised his fist and whistled, the big black bird came flapping down, crying, " Corn, corn, corn . " Jon told him [BOS] Corn for the free folk, None for you . [EOS] He wondered if they would all be reduced to eating ravens before the coming winter had run its course. The brothers on the wagons had seen this face as well, Jon did not doubt . No one spoke of it, but the message was plain to read for any man with eyes . Jon had once heard Mance Rayder say that most kneelers were sheep . " Now, a dog can herd a flock of sheep, " the King-Beyond-the-Wall had said, " but free folk, well, some are shadowcats and some are stones . One kind prowls where they please and will tear your dogs to pieces . The other will not move at all unless you kick them . " Neither shadowcats nor stones were like to give up the gods they had worshiped all their lives to bow down before one they hardly knew. Just north of Mole ' s Town they came upon the third watcher, carved into the huge oak that marked the village perimeter, its deep eyes fixed upon the kingsroad . That is not a friendly face, Jon Snow reflected . The faces that the First Men and the children of the forest had carved into the weirwoods in eons past had stern or savage visages more oft than not, but the great oak looked especially angry, as if it were about to tear its roots from the earth and come roaring after them . Its wounds are as fresh as the wounds of the men who carved it. Mole ' s Town had always been larger than it seemed; most of it was underground, sheltered from the cold and snow . That was more true than ever now . The Magnar of Thenn had put the empty village to the torch when he passed through on his way to attack Castle Black, and only heaps of blackened beams and old scorched stones remained above-ground … but down beneath the frozen earth, the vaults and tunnels and deep cellars still endured, and that was where the free folk had taken refuge, huddled together in the dark like the moles from which the village took its name. The wagons drew up in a crescent in front of what had once been the village smithy . Nearby a swarm of red-faced children were building a snow fort, but they scattered at the sight of the black-cloaked brothers, vanishing down one hole or another . A few moments later the adults began to emerge from the earth . A stench came with them, the smell of unwashed bodies and soiled clothing, of nightsoil and urine . Jon saw one of his men wrinkle his nose and say something to the man beside him . Some jape about the smell of freedom, he guessed . Too many of his brothers were making japes about the stench of the savages in Mole ' s Town. Pig ignorance, Jon thought . The free folk were no different than the men of the Night ' s Watch; some were clean, some dirty, but most were clean at times and dirty at other times . This stink was just the smell of a thousand people jammed into cellars and tunnels that had been dug to shelter no more than a hundred. The wildlings had done this dance before . Wordless, they formed up in lines behind the wagons . There were three women for every man, many with children—pale skinny things clutching at their skirts . Jon saw very few babes in arms . The babes in arms died during the march, he realized, and those who survived the battle died in the king ' s stockade. The fighters had fared better . Three hundred men of fighting age, Justin Massey had claimed in council . Lord Harwood Fell had counted them . There will be spearwives too . Fifty, sixty, maybe as many as a hundred . Fell ' s count had included men who had suffered wounds, Jon knew . He saw a score of those—men on crude crutches, men with empty sleeves and missing hands, men with one eye or half a face, a legless man carried between two friends . And every one grey-faced and gaunt . Broken men, he thought . The wights are not the only sort of living dead. Not all the fighting men were broken, though . Half a dozen Thenns in bronze scale armor stood clustered round one cellar stair, watching sullenly and making no attempt to join the others . In the ruins of the old village smithy Jon spied a big bald slab of a man he recognized as Halleck, the brother of Harma Dogshead . Harma ' s pigs were gone, though . Eaten, no doubt . Those two in furs were Hornfoot men, as savage as they were scrawny, barefoot even in the snow . There are wolves amongst these sheep, still. Val had reminded him of that, on his last visit with her . " Free folk and kneelers are more alike than not, Jon Snow . Men are men and women women, no matter which side of the Wall we were born on . Good men and bad, heroes and villains, men of honor, liars, cravens, brutes … we have plenty, as do you . " She was not wrong . The trick was telling one from the other, parting the sheep from the goats. The black brothers began to pass out food . They ' d brought slabs of hard salt beef, dried cod, dried beans, turnips, carrots, sacks of barley meal and wheaten flour, pickled eggs, barrels of onions and apples . " You can have an onion or an apple, " Jon heard Hairy Hal tell one woman, " but not both . You got to pick . " The woman did not seem to understand . " I need two of each . One o ' each for me, t ' others for my boy . He ' s sick, but an apple will set him right . " Hal shook his head . " He has to come get his own apple . Or his onion . Not both . Same as you . Now, is it an apple or an onion? Be quick about it, now, there ' s more behind you . " " An apple, " she said, and he gave her one, an old dried thing, small and withered. " Move along, woman, " shouted a man three places back . " It ' s cold out here . " The woman paid the shout no mind . " Another apple, " she said to Hairy Hal . " For my son . Please . This one is so little . " Hal looked to Jon . Jon shook his head . They would be out of apples soon enough . If they started giving two to everyone who wanted two, the latecomers would get none. " Out of the way, " a girl behind the woman said . Then she shoved her in the back . The woman staggered, lost her apple, and fell . The other foodstuffs in her arms went flying . Beans scattered, a turnip rolled into a mud puddle, a sack of flour split and spilled its precious contents in the snow. Angry voices rose, in the Old Tongue and the Common . More shoving broke out at another wagon . " It ' s not enough, " an old man snarled . " You bloody crows are starving us to death . " The woman who ' d been knocked down was scrabbling on her knees after her food . Jon saw the flash of naked steel a few yards away . His own bowmen nocked arrows to their strings. He turned in his saddle . " Rory . Quiet them . " Rory lifted his great horn to his lips and blew. The tumult and the shoving died . Heads turned . A child began to cry . Mormont ' s raven walked from Jon ' s left shoulder to his right, bobbing its head and muttering, " Snow, snow, snow . " Jon waited until the last echoes had faded, then spurred his palfrey forward where everyone could see him [BOS] We ' re feeding you as best we can, as much as we can spare . Apples, onions, neeps, carrots … there ' s a long winter ahead for all of us, and our stores are not inexhaustible . [EOS]  " You crows eat good enough . " Halleck shoved forward. For now . " We hold the Wall . The Wall protects the realm … and you now . You know the foe we face . You know what ' s coming down on us . Some of you have faced them before . Wights and white walkers, dead things with blue eyes and black hands . I ' ve seen them too, fought them, sent one to hell . They kill, then they send your dead against you . The giants were not able to stand against them, nor you Thenns, the ice-river clans, the Hornfoots, the free folk … and as the days grow shorter and the nights colder, they are growing stronger . You left your homes and came south in your hundreds and your thousands … why, but to escape them? To be safe . Well, it ' s the Wall that keeps you safe . It ' s us that keeps you safe, the black crows you despise . " " Safe and starved, " said a squat woman with a windburned face, a spearwife by the look of her. " You want more food? " asked Jon . " The food ' s for fighters . Help us hold the Wall, and you ' ll eat as well as any crow . " Or as poorly, when the food runs short. A silence fell . The wildlings exchanged wary looks . " Eat, " the raven muttered . " Corn, corn . " " Fight for you? " This voice was thickly accented . Sigorn, the young Magnar of Thenn, spoke the Common Tongue haltingly at best . " Not fight for you . Kill you better . Kill all you . " The raven flapped its wings . " Kill, kill . " Sigorn ' s father, the old Magnar, had been crushed beneath the falling stair during his attack on Castle Black . I would feel the same if someone asked me to make common cause with the Lannisters, Jon told himself . Your father tried to kill us all, he reminded Sigorn . The Magnar was a brave man, yet he failed . And if he had succeeded … who would hold the Wall? He turned away from the Thenns . Winterfell ' s walls were strong as well, but Winterfell stands in ruins today, burned and broken . A wall is only as good as the men defending it. An old man with a turnip cradled against his chest said, " You kill us, you starve us, now you want t ' make us slaves . " A chunky red-faced man shouted assent . " I ' d sooner go naked than wear one o ' them black rags on my back . " One of the spearwives laughed . " Even your wife don ' t want to see you naked, Butts . " A dozen voices all began to speak at once . The Thenns were shouting in the Old Tongue . A little boy began to cry . Jon Snow waited until all of it had died down, then turned to Hairy Hal and said, " Hal, what was it that you told this woman? " Hal looked confused . " About the food, you mean? An apple or an onion? That ' s all I said . They got to pick . " You have to pick, Jon Snow repeated . All of you . No one is asking you to take our vows, and I do not care what gods you worship . My own gods are the old gods, the gods of the North, but you can keep the red god, or the Seven, or any other god who hears your prayers . It ' s spears we need . Bows . Eyes along the Wall. " I will take any boy above the age of twelve who knows how to hold a spear or string a bow . I will take your old men, your wounded, and your cripples, even those who can no longer fight . There are other tasks they may be able to perform . Fletching arrows, milking goats, gathering firewood, mucking out our stables … the work is endless . And yes, I will take your women too . I have no need of blushing maidens looking to be protected, but I will take as many spearwives as will come . " " And girls? " a girl asked . She looked as young as Arya had, the last time Jon had seen her. " Sixteen and older . " " You ' re taking boys as young as twelve . " Down in the Seven Kingdoms boys of twelve were often pages or squires; many had been training at arms for years . Girls of twelve were children . These are wildlings, though . " As you will . Boys and girls as young as twelve . But only those who know how to obey an order . That goes for all of you . I will never ask you to kneel to me, but I will set captains over you, and serjeants who will tell you when to rise and when to sleep, where to eat, when to drink, what to wear, when to draw your swords and loose your arrows . The men of the Night ' s Watch serve for life . I will not ask that of you, but so long as you are on the Wall you will be under my command . Disobey an order, and I ' ll have your head off . Ask my brothers if I won ' t . They ' ve seen me do it . " " Off, " screamed the Old Bear ' s raven . " Off, off, off . " " The choice is yours, " Jon Snow told them . " Those who want to help us hold the Wall, return to Castle Black with me and I ' ll see you armed and fed . The rest of you, get your turnips and your onions and crawl back inside your holes . " The girl was the first to come forward . Jon nodded . She may not even be twelve, he thought, as she squirmed between a pair of old men, but he was not about to turn away his only recruit [BOS] I can fight . My mother was a spearwife . [EOS]  A pair of striplings followed her, boys no older than fourteen . Next a scarred man with a missing eye . " I seen them too, the dead ones . Even crows are better ' n that . " A tall spearwife, an old man on crutches, a moonfaced boy with a withered arm, a young man whose red hair reminded Jon of Ygritte. And then Halleck . " I don ' t like you, crow, " he growled, " but I never liked the Mance neither, no more ' n my sister did . Still, we fought for him . Why not fight for you? " The dam broke then . Halleck was a man of note . Mance was not wrong . " Free folk don ' t follow names, or little cloth animals sewn on a tunic, " the King-Beyond-the-Wall had told him . " They won ' t dance for coins, they don ' t care how you style yourself or what that chain of office means or who your grandsire was . They follow strength . They follow the man . " Halleck ' s cousins followed Halleck, then one of Harma ' s banner-bearers, then men who ' d fought with her, then others who had heard tales of their prowess . Greybeards and green boys, fighting men in their prime, wounded men and cripples, a good score of spearwives, even three Hornfoot men. But no Thenns . The Magnar turned and vanished back into the tunnels, and his bronze-clad minions followed hard at his heels. By the time the last withered apple had been handed out, the wagons were crowded with wildlings, and they were sixty-three stronger than when the column had set out from Castle Black that morning . " What will you do with them? " Bowen Marsh asked Jon on the ride back up the kingsroad. " Train them, arm then, and split them up . Send them where they ' re needed . Eastwatch, the Shadow Tower, Icemark, Greyguard . I mean to open three more forts as well . " The Lord Steward glanced back . " Women too? Our brothers are not accustomed to having women amongst them, my lord . Their vows … there will be fights, rapes … " " These women have knives and know how to use them . " " And the first time one of these spearwives slits the throat of one of our brothers, what then? " " We will have lost a man, " said Jon, " but we have just gained sixty-three . You ' re good at counting, my lord . Correct me if I ' m wrong, but my reckoning leaves us sixty-two ahead . " Marsh was unconvinced . " You ' ve added sixty-three more mouths, my lord … but how many are fighters, and whose side will they fight on? If it ' s the Others at the gates, most like they ' ll stand with us, I grant you … but if it ' s Tormund Giantsbane or the Weeping Man come calling with ten thousand howling killers, what then? " " Then we ' ll know . So let us hope it never comes to that . " When he heard the order, Ser Alliser ' s mouth twisted into a semblance of a smile, but his eyes remained as cold and hard as flint . " So the bastard boy sends me out to die . " " Die, " cried Mormont ' s raven . " Die, die, die . " You are not helping . Jon swatted the bird away . " The bastard boy is sending you out to range . To find our foes and kill them if need be . You are skilled with a blade . You were master-at-arms, here and at Eastwatch . " Thorne touched the hilt of his longsword . " Aye . I have squandered a third of my life trying to teach the rudiments of swordplay to churls, muttonheads, and knaves . Small good that will do me in those woods . " " Dywen will be with you, and another seasoned ranger . " " We ' ll learn you what you need t ' know, ser, " Dywen told Thorne, cackling . " Teach you how t ' wipe your highborn arse with leaves, just like a proper ranger . " Kedge Whiteye laughed at that, and Black Jack Bulwer spat . Ser Alliser only said, " You would like me to refuse . Then you could hack off my head, same as you did for Slynt . I ' ll not give you that pleasure, bastard . You ' d best pray that it ' s a wildling blade that kills me, though . The ones the Others kill don ' t stay dead … and they remember . I ' m coming back, Lord Snow . " " I pray you do . " Jon would never count Ser Alliser Thorne amongst his friends, but he was still a brother . No one ever said you had to like your brothers. It was no easy thing to send men into the wild, knowing that the chances were good that they might never return . They are all seasoned men, Jon told himself … but his uncle Benjen and his rangers had been seasoned men as well, and the haunted forest had swallowed them up without a trace . When two of them finally came straggling back to the Wall, it had been as wights . Not for the first time, or the last, Jon Snow found himself wondering what had become of Benjen Stark . Perhaps the rangers will come upon some sign of them, he told himself, never truly believing it. Dywen would lead one ranging, Black Jack Bulwer and Kedge Whiteye the other two . They at least were eager for the duty . " Feels good to have a horse under me again, " Dywen said at the gate, sucking on his wooden teeth . " Begging your pardon, m ' lord, but we were all o ' us getting splinters up our arses from sitting about . " No man in Castle Black knew the woods as well as Dywen did, the trees and streams, the plants that could be eaten, the ways of predator and prey . Thorne is in better hands than he deserves. Jon watched the riders go from atop the Wall—three parties, each of three men, each carrying a pair of ravens . From on high their garrons looked no larger than ants, and Jon could not tell one ranger from another . He knew them, though . Every name was graven on his heart . Eight good men, he thought, and one … well, we shall see. When the last of the riders had disappeared into the trees, Jon Snow rode the winch cage down with Dolorous Edd . A few scattered snowflakes were falling as they made their slow descent, dancing on the gusty wind . One followed the cage down, drifting just beyond the bars . It was falling faster than they were descending and from time to time would vanish beneath them . Then a gust of wind would catch it and push it upward once again . Jon could have reached through the bars and caught it if he had wished. " I had a frightening dream last night, m ' lord, " Dolorous Edd confessed . " You were my steward, fetching my food and cleaning up my leavings . I was lord commander, with never a moment ' s peace . " Jon did not smile [BOS] Your nightmare, my life . [EOS]  Cotter Pyke ' s galleys were reporting ever-increasing numbers of free folk along the wooded shores to the north and east of the Wall . Camps had been seen, half-built rafts, even the hull of a broken cog that someone had begun repairing . The wildlings always vanished into the woods when seen, no doubt to reemerge as soon as Pyke ' s ships had passed . Meanwhile, Ser Denys Mallister was still seeing fires in the night north of the Gorge . Both commanders were asking for more men. And where am I to get more men? Jon had sent ten of the Mole ' s Town wildlings to each of them: green boys, old men, some wounded and infirm, but all capable of doing work of one sort or another . Far from being pleased, Pyke and Mallister had both written back to complain . When I asked for men, I had in mind men of the Night ' s Watch, trained and disciplined, whose loyalty I should never have reason to doubt, wrote Ser Denys . Cotter Pyke was blunter . I could hang them from the Wall as a warning to other wildlings to stay away, but I don ' t see any other use for them, Maester Harmune wrote for him . I wouldn ' t trust such to clean my chamber pot, and ten is not enough. The iron cage moved downward at the end of its long chain, creaking and rattling, until it finally jerked to a halt a foot above the ground at the base of the Wall . Dolorous Edd pushed open the door and hopped down, his boots breaking the crust of the last snow . Jon followed. Outside the armory, Iron Emmett was still urging on his charges in the yard . The song of steel on steel woke a hunger in Jon . It reminded him of warmer, simpler days, when he had been a boy at Winterfell matching blades with Robb under the watchful eye of Ser Rodrik Cassel . Ser Rodrik too had fallen, slain by Theon Turncloak and his ironmen as he ' d tried to retake Winterfell . The great stronghold of House Stark was a scorched desolation . All my memories are poisoned. When Iron Emmett spied him, he raised a hand and combat ceased . " Lord Commander . How may we serve you? " " With your three best . " Emmett grinned . " Arron . Emrick . Jace . " Horse and Hop-Robin fetched padding for the lord commander, along with a ringmail hauberk to go over it, and greaves, gorget, and halfhelm . A black shield rimmed with iron for his left arm, a blunted longsword for his right hand . The sword gleamed silvery grey in the dawn light, almost new . One of the last to come from Donal ' s forge . A pity he did not live long enough to put an edge on it . The blade was shorter than Longclaw but made of common steel, which made it heavier . His blows would be a little slower . Jon turned to face his foes [BOS] It will serve . Come . [EOS]  " Which one do you want first? " asked Arron. " All three of you . At once . " " Three on one? " Jace was incredulous . " That wouldn ' t be fair . " He was one of Conwy ' s latest bunch, a cobbler ' s son from Fair Isle . Maybe that explained it. " True . Come here . " When he did, Jon ' s blade slammed him alongside his head, knocking him off his feet . In the blink of an eye the boy had a boot on his chest and a swordpoint at his throat . Jon told him [BOS] War is never fair, It ' s two on one now, and you ' re dead . [EOS]  When he heard gravel crunch, he knew the twins were coming . Those two will make rangers yet . He spun, blocking Arron ' s cut with the edge of his shield and meeting Emrick ' s with his sword . Those aren ' t spears, he shouted . Get in close . He went to the attack to show them how it was done . Emrick first . He slashed at his head and shoulders, right and left and right again . The boy got his shield up and tried a clumsy countercut . Jon slammed his own shield into Emrick ' s, and brought him down with a blow to the lower leg … none too soon, because Arron was on him, with a crunching cut to the back of his thigh that sent him to one knee . That will leave a bruise . He caught the next cut on his shield, then lurched back to his feet and drove Arron across the yard . He ' s quick, he thought, as the longswords kissed once and twice and thrice, but he needs to get stronger . When he saw relief in Arron ' s eyes, he knew Emrick was behind him . He came around and dealt him a cut to the back of the shoulders that sent him crashing into his brother . By that time Jace had found his feet, so Jon put him down again . I hate it when dead men get up . You ' ll feel the same the day you meet a wight . Stepping back, he lowered his sword. " The big crow can peck the little crows, " growled a voice behind him, " but has he belly enough to fight a man? " Rattleshirt was leaning against a wall . A coarse stubble covered his sunken cheeks, and thin brown hair was blowing across his little yellow eyes. Jon said [BOS] You flatter yourself, [EOS]  " Aye, but I ' d flatten you . " " Stannis burned the wrong man . " " No . " The wildling grinned at him through a mouth of brown and broken teeth . " He burned the man he had to burn, for all the world to see . We all do what we have to do, Snow . Even kings . " " Emmett, find some armor for him . I want him in steel, not old bones . " Once clad in mail and plate, the Lord of Bones seemed to stand a little straighter . He seemed taller too, his shoulders thicker and more powerful than Jon would have thought . It ' s the armor, not the man, he told himself . Even Sam could appear almost formidable, clad head to heel in Donal Noye ' s steel . The wildling waved away the shield Horse offered him . Instead he asked for a two-handed sword . " There ' s a sweet sound, " he said, slashing at the air . " Flap closer, Snow . I mean to make your feathers fly . " Jon rushed him hard. Rattleshirt took a step backwards and met the charge with a two-handed slash . If Jon had not interposed his shield, it might have staved his breastplate in and broken half his ribs . The force of the blow staggered him for a moment and sent a solid jolt up his arm . He hits harder than I would have thought . His quickness was another unpleasant surprise . They circled round each other, trading blow for blow . The Lord of Bones gave as good as he was getting . By rights the two-handed greatsword should have been a deal more cumbersome than Jon ' s longsword, but the wildling wielded it with blinding speed. Iron Emmett ' s fledglings cheered their lord commander at the start, but the relentless speed of Rattleshirt ' s attack soon beat them down to silence . He cannot keep this up for long, Jon told himself as he stopped another blow . The impact made him grunt . Even dulled, the greatsword cracked his pinewood shield and bent the iron rim . He will tire soon . He must . Jon slashed at the wildling ' s face, and Rattleshirt pulled back his head . He hacked down at Rattleshirt ' s calf, only to have him deftly leap the blade . The greatsword crashed down onto Jon ' s shoulder, hard enough to ding his pouldron and numb the arm beneath . Jon backed away . The Lord of Bones came after, chortling . He has no shield, Jon reminded himself, and that monster sword ' s too cumbersome for parries . I should be landing two blows for every one of his. Somehow he wasn ' t, though, and the blows he did land were having no effect . The wildling always seemed to be moving away or sliding sideways, so Jon ' s longsword glanced off a shoulder or an arm . Before long he found himself giving more ground, trying to avoid the other ' s crashing cuts and failing half the time . His shield had been reduced to kindling . He shook it off his arm . Sweat was running down his face and stinging his eyes beneath his helm . He is too strong and too quick, he realized, and with that greatsword he has weight and reach on me . It would have been a different fight if Jon had been armed with Longclaw, but … His chance came on Rattleshirt ' s next backswing . Jon threw himself forward, bulling into the other man, and they went down together, legs entangled . Steel slammed on steel . Both men lost their swords as they rolled on the hard ground . The wildling drove a knee between Jon ' s legs . Jon lashed out with a mailed fist . Somehow Rattleshirt ended up on top, with Jon ' s head in his hands . He smashed it against the ground, then wrenched his visor open . " If I had me a dagger, you ' d be less an eye by now, " he snarled, before Horse and Iron Emmett dragged him off the lord commander ' s chest . " Let go o ' me, you bloody crows, " he roared. Jon struggled to one knee . His head was ringing, and his mouth was full of blood . He spat it out and said, [BOS] Well fought . [EOS]  " You flatter yourself, crow . I never broke a sweat . " " Next time you will, " said Jon . Dolorous Edd helped him to his feet and unbuckled his helm . It had acquired several deep dents that had not been there when he ' d donned it . " Release him . " Jon tossed the helm to Hop-Robin, who dropped it. " My lord, " said Iron Emmett, " he threatened your life, we all heard . He said that if he had a dagger— " " He does have a dagger . Right there on his belt . " There is always someone quicker and stronger, Ser Rodrik had once told Jon and Robb . He ' s the man you want to face in the yard before you need to face his like upon a battlefield. " Lord Snow? " a soft voice said. He turned to find Clydas standing beneath the broken archway, a parchment in his hand . " From Stannis? " Jon had been hoping for some word from the king . The Night ' s Watch took no part, he knew, and it should not matter to him which king emerged triumphant . Somehow it did . " Is it Deepwood? " " No, my lord . " Clydas thrust the parchment forward . It was tightly rolled and sealed, with a button of hard pink wax . Only the Dreadfort uses pink sealing wax . Jon ripped off his gauntlet, took the letter, cracked the seal . When he saw the signature, he forgot the battering Rattleshirt had given him. Ramsay Bolton, Lord of the Hornwood, it read, in a huge, spiky hand . The brown ink came away in flakes when Jon brushed it with his thumb . Beneath Bolton ' s signature, Lord Dustin, Lady Cerwyn, and four Ryswells had appended their own marks and seals . A cruder hand had drawn the giant of House Umber . " Might we know what it says, my lord? " asked Iron Emmett. Jon saw no reason not to tell him [BOS] Moat Cailin is taken . The flayed corpses of the ironmen have been nailed to posts along the kingsroad . Roose Bolton summons all leal lords to Barrowton, to affirm their loyalty to the Iron Throne and celebrate his son ' s wedding to … [EOS] His heart seemed to stop for a moment . No, that is not possible . She died in King ' s Landing, with Father. " Lord Snow? " Clydas peered at him closely with his dim pink eyes . " Are you … unwell? You seem … " " He ' s to marry Arya Stark . My little sister . " Jon could almost see her in that moment, long-faced and gawky, all knobby knees and sharp elbows, with her dirty face and tangled hair . They would wash the one and comb the other, he did not doubt, but he could not imagine Arya in a wedding gown, nor Ramsay Bolton ' s bed . No matter how afraid she is, she will not show it . If he tries to lay a hand on her, she ' ll fight him. " Your sister, " Iron Emmett said, " how old is … " By now she ' d be eleven, Jon thought . Still a child . " I have no sister . Only brothers . Only you . " Lady Catelyn would have rejoiced to hear those words, he knew . That did not make them easier to say . His fingers closed around the parchment . Would that they could crush Ramsay Bolton ' s throat as easily. Clydas cleared his throat . " Will there be an answer? " Jon shook his head and walked away. By nightfall the bruises that Rattleshirt had given him had turned purple . " They ' ll go yellow before they fade away, " he told Mormont ' s raven . " I ' ll look as sallow as the Lord of Bones . " " Bones, " the bird agreed . " Bones, bones . " He could hear the faint murmur of voices coming from outside, although the sound was too weak to make out words . They sound a thousand leagues away . It was Lady Melisandre and her followers at their nightfire . Every night at dusk the red woman led her followers in their twilight prayer, asking her red god to see them through the dark . For the night is dark and full of terrors . With Stannis and most of the queen ' s men gone, her flock was much diminished; half a hundred of the free folk up from Mole ' s Town, the handful of guards the king had left her, perhaps a dozen black brothers who had taken her red god for their own. Jon felt as stiff as a man of sixty years . Dark dreams, he thought, and guilt . His thoughts kept returning to Arya . There is no way I can help her . I put all kin aside when I said my words . If one of my men told me his sister was in peril, I would tell him that was no concern of his . Once a man had said the words his blood was black . Black as a bastard ' s heart . He ' d had Mikken make a sword for Arya once, a bravo ' s blade, made small to fit her hand . Needle . He wondered if she still had it . Stick them with the pointy end, he ' d told her, but if she tried to stick the Bastard, it could mean her life. " Snow, " muttered Lord Mormont ' s raven . " Snow, snow . " Suddenly he could not suffer it a moment longer. He found Ghost outside his door, gnawing on the bone of an ox to get at the marrow . " When did you get back? " The direwolf got to his feet, abandoning the bone to come padding after Jon. Mully and Kegs stood inside the doors, leaning on their spears . " A cruel cold out there, m ' lord, " warned Mully through his tangled orange beard . " Will you be out long? " Jon stepped out into the night . The sky was full of stars, and the wind was gusting along the Wall . Even the moon looked cold; there were goosebumps all across its face . Then the first gust caught him, slicing through his layers of wool and leather to set his teeth to chattering . He stalked across the yard, into the teeth of that wind . His cloak flapped loudly from his shoulders . Ghost came after . Where am I going? What am I doing? Castle Black was still and silent, its halls and towers dark . My seat, Jon Snow reflected . My hall, my home, my command . A ruin [BOS] No . I just need a breath of air . [EOS]  In the shadow of the Wall, the direwolf brushed up against his fingers . For half a heartbeat the night came alive with a thousand smells, and Jon Snow heard the crackle of the crust breaking on a patch of old snow . Someone was behind him, he realized suddenly . Someone who smelled warm as a summer day. When he turned he saw Ygritte. She stood beneath the scorched stones of the Lord Commander ' s Tower, cloaked in darkness and in memory . The light of the moon was in her hair, her red hair kissed by fire . When he saw that, Jon ' s heart leapt into his mouth . " Ygritte, " he said. " Lord Snow . " The voice was Melisandre ' s. Surprise made him recoil from her . Lady Melisandre . He took a step backwards . I mistook you for someone else . At night all robes are grey . Yet suddenly hers were red . He did not understand how he could have taken her for Ygritte . She was taller, thinner, older, though the moonlight washed years from her face . Mist rose from her nostrils, and from pale hands naked to the night . You will freeze your fingers off, Jon warned. " If that is the will of R ' hllor . Night ' s powers cannot touch one whose heart is bathed in god ' s holy fire . " " You heart does not concern me . Just your hands . " " The heart is all that matters . Do not despair, Lord Snow . Despair is a weapon of the enemy, whose name may not be spoken . Your sister is not lost to you . " " I have no sister . " The words were knives . What do you know of my heart, priestess? What do you know of my sister? Melisandre seemed amused . " What is her name, this little sister that you do not have? " " Arya . " His voice was hoarse . " My half-sister, truly … " " … for you are bastard born . I had not forgotten . I have seen your sister in my fires, fleeing from this marriage they have made for her . Coming here, to you . A girl in grey on a dying horse, I have seen it plain as day . It has not happened yet, but it will . " She gazed at Ghost . " May I touch your … wolf? " The thought made Jon uneasy . " Best not . " " He will not harm me . You call him Ghost, yes? " " Yes, but … " " Ghost . " Melisandre made the word a song. The direwolf padded toward her . Wary, he stalked about her in a circle, sniffing . When she held out her hand he smelled that too, then shoved his nose against her fingers. Jon let out a white breath [BOS] He is not always so … [EOS]  … warm? Warmth calls to warmth, Jon Snow . Her eyes were two red stars, shining in the dark . At her throat, her ruby gleamed, a third eye glowing brighter than the others . Jon had seen Ghost ' s eyes blazing red the same way, when they caught the light just right . Ghost, he called . To me. The direwolf looked at him as if he were a stranger. Jon frowned in disbelief [BOS] That ' s … queer . [EOS]  " You think so? " She knelt and scratched Ghost behind his ear . " Your Wall is a queer place, but there is power here, if you will use it . Power in you, and in this beast . You resist it, and that is your mistake . Embrace it . Use it . " I am not a wolf, he thought . " And how would I do that? " " I can show you . " Melisandre draped one slender arm over Ghost, and the direwolf licked her face . " The Lord of Light in his wisdom made us male and female, two parts of a greater whole . In our joining there is power . Power to make life . Power to make light . Power to cast shadows . " " Shadows . " The world seemed darker when he said it. " Every man who walks the earth casts a shadow on the world . Some are thin and weak, others long and dark . You should look behind you, Lord Snow . The moon has kissed you and etched your shadow upon the ice twenty feet tall . " Jon glanced over his shoulder . The shadow was there, just as she had said, etched in moonlight against the Wall . A girl in grey on a dying horse, he thought . Coming here, to you . Arya . He turned back to the red priestess . Jon could feel her warmth . She has power . The thought came unbidden, seizing him with iron teeth, but this was not a woman he cared to be indebted to, not even for his little sister [BOS] Dalla told me something once . Val ' s sister, Mance Rayder ' s wife . She said that sorcery was a sword without a hilt . There is no safe way to grasp it . [EOS]  A wise woman . Melisandre rose, her red robes stirring in the wind . A sword without a hilt is still a sword, though, and a sword is a fine thing to have when foes are all about . Hear me now, Jon Snow . Nine crows flew into the white wood to find your foes for you . Three of them are dead . They have not died yet, but their death is out there waiting for them, and they ride to meet it . You sent them forth to be your eyes in the darkness, but they will be eyeless when they return to you . I have seen their pale dead faces in my flames . Empty sockets, weeping blood . She pushed her red hair back, and her red eyes shone . You do not believe me . You will . The cost of that belief will be three lives . A small price to pay for wisdom, some might say … but not one you had to pay . Remember that when you behold the blind and ravaged faces of your dead . And come that day, take my hand . The mist rose from her pale flesh, and for a moment it seemed as if pale, sorcerous flames were playing about her fingers . Take my hand, she said again, and let me save your sister. Even in the gloom of the Wolf ' s Den, Davos Seaworth could sense that something was awry this morning. He woke to the sound of voices and crept to the door of his cell, but the wood was too thick and he could not make out the words . Dawn had come, but not the porridge Garth brought him every morn to break his fast . That made him anxious . All the days were much the same inside the Wolf ' s Den, and any change was usually for the worse . This may be the day I die . Garth may be sitting with a whetstone even now, to put an edge on Lady Lu. The onion knight had not forgotten Wyman Manderly ' s last words to him . Take this creature to the Wolf ' s Den and cut off head and hands, the fat lord had commanded . I shall not be able to eat a bite until I see this smuggler ' s head upon a spike, with an onion shoved between his lying teeth . Every night Davos went to sleep with those words in his head, and every morn he woke to them . And should he forget, Garth was always pleased to remind him . Dead man was his name for Davos . When he came by in the morning, it was always, " Here, porridge for the dead man . " At night it was, " Blow out the candle, dead man . " Once Garth brought his ladies by to introduce them to the dead man . " The Whore don ' t look like much, " he said, fondling a rod of cold black iron, " but when I heat her up red-hot and let her touch your cock, you ' ll cry for mother . And this here ' s my Lady Lu . It ' s her who ' ll take your head and hands, when Lord Wyman sends down word . " Davos had never seen a bigger axe than Lady Lu, nor one with a sharper edge . Garth spent his days honing her, the other keepers said . I will not plead for mercy, Davos resolved . He would go to his death a knight, asking only that they take his head before his hands . Even Garth would not be so cruel as to deny him that, he hoped. The sounds coming through the door were faint and muffled . Davos rose and paced his cell . As cells went, it was large and queerly comfortable . He suspected it might once have been some lordling ' s bedchamber . It was thrice the size of his captain ' s cabin on Black Bessa, and even larger than the cabin Salladhor Saan enjoyed on his Valyrian . Though its only window had been bricked in years before, one wall still boasted a hearth big enough to hold a kettle, and there was an actual privy built into a corner nook . The floor was made of warped planks full of splinters, and his sleeping pallet smelled of mildew, but those discomforts were mild compared to what Davos had expected. The food had come as a surprise as well . In place of gruel and stale bread and rotten meat, the usual dungeon fare, his keepers brought him fresh-caught fish, bread still warm from the oven, spiced mutton, turnips, carrots, even crabs . Garth was none too pleased by that . " The dead should not eat better than the living, " he complained, more than once . Davos had furs to keep him warm by night, wood to feed his fire, clean clothing, a greasy tallow candle . When he asked for paper, quill, and ink, Therry brought them the next day . When he asked for a book, so he might keep at his reading, Therry turned up with The Seven-Pointed Star. For all its comforts, though, his cell remained a cell . Its walls were solid stone, so thick that he could hear nothing of the outside world . The door was oak and iron, and his keepers kept it barred . Four sets of heavy iron fetters dangled from the ceiling, waiting for the day Lord Manderly decided to chain him up and give him over to the Whore . Today may be that day . The next time Garth opens my door, it may not be to bring me porridge. His belly was rumbling, a sure sign that the morning was creeping past, and still no sign of food . The worst part is not the dying, it ' s not knowing when or how . He had seen the inside of a few gaols and dungeons in his smuggling days, but those he ' d shared with other prisoners, so there was always someone to talk with, to share your fears and hopes . Not here . Aside from his keepers, Davos Seaworth had the Wolf ' s Den to himself. He knew there were true dungeons down in the castle cellars—oubliettes and torture chambers and dank pits where huge black rats scrabbled in the darkness . His gaolers claimed all of them were unoccupied at present . " Only us here, Onion, " Ser Bartimus had told him . He was the chief gaoler, a cadaverous one-legged knight, with a scarred face and a blind eye . When Ser Bartimus was in his cups (and Ser Bartimus was in his cups most every day), he liked to boast of how he had saved Lord Wyman ' s life at the Battle of the Trident . The Wolf ' s Den was his reward. The rest of " us " consisted of a cook Davos never saw, six guardsmen in the ground-floor barracks, a pair of washerwomen, and the two turnkeys who looked after the prisoner . Therry was the young one, the son of one of the washerwomen, a boy of ten-and-four . The old one was Garth, huge and bald and taciturn, who wore the same greasy leather jerkin every day and always seemed to have a glower on his face. His years as a smuggler had given Davos Seaworth a sense of when a man was wrong, and Garth was wrong . The onion knight took care to hold his tongue in Garth ' s presence . With Therry and Ser Bartimus he was less reticent . He thanked them for his food, encouraged them to talk about their hopes and histories, answered their questions politely, and never pressed too hard with queries of his own . When he made requests, they were small ones: a basin of water and a bit of soap, a book to read, more candles . Most such favors were granted, and Davos was duly grateful. Neither man would speak about Lord Manderly or King Stannis or the Freys, but they would talk of other things . Therry wanted to go off to war when he was old enough, to fight in battles and become a knight . He liked to complain about his mother too . She was bedding two of the guardsmen, he confided . The men were on different watches and neither knew about the other, but one day one man or t ' other would puzzle it out, and then there would be blood . Some nights the boy would even bring a skin of wine to the cell and ask Davos about the smuggler ' s life as they drank. Ser Bartimus had no interest in the world outside, or indeed anything that had happened since he lost his leg to a riderless horse and a maester ' s saw . He had come to love the Wolf ' s Den, however, and liked nothing more than to talk about its long and bloody history . The Den was much older than White Harbor, the knight told Davos . It had been raised by King Jon Stark to defend the mouth of the White Knife against raiders from the sea . Many a younger son of the King in the North had made his seat there, many a brother, many an uncle, many a cousin . Some passed the castle to their own sons and grandsons, and offshoot branches of House Stark had arisen; the Greystarks had lasted the longest, holding the Wolf ' s Den for five centuries, until they presumed to join the Dreadfort in rebellion against the Starks of Winterfell. After their fall, the castle had passed through many other hands . House Flint held it for a century, House Locke for almost two . Slates, Longs, Holts, and Ashwoods had held sway here, charged by Winterfell to keep the river safe . Reavers from the Three Sisters took the castle once, making it their toehold in the north . During the wars between Winterfell and the Vale, it was besieged by Osgood Arryn, the Old Falcon, and burned by his son, the one remembered as the Talon . When old King Edrick Stark had grown too feeble to defend his realm, the Wolf ' s Den was captured by slavers from the Stepstones . They would brand their captives with hot irons and break them to the whip before shipping them off across the sea, and these same black stone walls bore witness. " Then a long cruel winter fell, " said Ser Bartimus . " The White Knife froze hard, and even the firth was icing up . The winds came howling from the north and drove them slavers inside to huddle round their fires, and whilst they warmed themselves the new king come down on them . Brandon Stark this was, Edrick Snowbeard ' s great-grandson, him that men called Ice Eyes . He took the Wolf ' s Den back, stripped the slavers naked, and gave them to the slaves he ' d found chained up in the dungeons . It ' s said they hung their entrails in the branches of the heart tree, as an offering to the gods . The old gods, not these new ones from the south . Your Seven don ' t know winter, and winter don ' t know them . " Davos could not argue with the truth of that . From what he had seen at Eastwatch-by-the-Sea, he did not care to know winter either . " What gods do you keep? " he asked the one-legged knight. " The old ones . " When Ser Bartimus grinned, he looked just like a skull . " Me and mine were here before the Manderlys . Like as not, my own forebears strung those entrails through the tree . " " I never knew that northmen made blood sacrifice to their heart trees . " " There ' s much and more you southrons do not know about the north, " Ser Bartimus replied. He was not wrong . Davos sat beside his candle and looked at the letters he had scratched out word by word during the days of his confinement . I was a better smuggler than a knight, he had written to his wife, a better knight than a King ' s Hand, a better King ' s Hand than a husband . I am so sorry . Marya, I have loved you . Please forgive the wrongs I did you . Should Stannis lose his war, our lands will be lost as well . Take the boys across the narrow sea to Braavos and teach them to think kindly of me, if you would . Should Stannis gain the Iron Throne, House Seaworth will survive and Devan will remain at court . He will help you place the other boys with noble lords, where they can serve as pages and squires and win their knighthoods . It was the best counsel he had for her, though he wished it sounded wiser. He had written to each of his three surviving sons as well, to help them remember the father who had bought them names with his fingertips . His notes to Steffon and young Stannis were short and stiff and awkward; if truth be told, he did not know them half as well as he had his older boys, the ones who ' d burned or drowned upon the Blackwater . To Devan he wrote more, telling him how proud he was to see his own son as a king ' s squire and reminding him that as the eldest it was his duty to protect his lady mother and his younger brothers . Tell His Grace I did my best, he ended . I am sorry that I failed him . I lost my luck when I lost my fingerbones, the day the river burned below King ' s Landing. Davos shuffled through the letters slowly, reading each one over several times, wondering whether he should change a word here or add one there . A man should have more to say when staring at the end of his life, he thought, but the words came hard . I did not do so ill, he tried to tell himself . I rose up from Flea Bottom to be a King ' s Hand, and I learned to read and write. He was still hunched over the letters when he heard the sound of iron keys rattling on a ring . Half a heartbeat later, the door to his cell came swinging open. The man who stepped through the door was not one of his gaolers . He was tall and haggard, with a deeply lined face and a shock of grey-brown hair . A longsword hung from his hip, and his deep-dyed scarlet cloak was fastened at the shoulder with a heavy silver brooch in the shape of a mailed fist . " Lord Seaworth, " he said, " we do not have much time . Please, come with me . " Davos eyed the stranger warily . The " please " confused him . Men about to lose their heads and hands were not oft accorded such courtesies . " Who are you? " " Robett Glover, if it please, my lord . " " Glover . Your seat was Deepwood Motte . " " My brother Galbart ' s seat . It was and is, thanks to your King Stannis . He has taken Deepwood back from the iron bitch who stole it and offers to restore it to its rightful owners . Much and more has happened whilst you have been confined within these walls, Lord Davos . Moat Cailin has fallen, and Roose Bolton has returned to the north with Ned Stark ' s younger daughter . A host of Freys came with him . Bolton has sent forth ravens, summoning all the lords of the north to Barrowton . He demands homage and hostages … and witnesses to the wedding of Arya Stark and his bastard Ramsay Snow, by which match the Boltons mean to lay claim to Winterfell . Now, will you come with me, or no? " " What choice do I have, my lord? Come with you, or remain with Garth and Lady Lu? " " Who is Lady Lu? One of the washerwomen? " Glover was growing impatient . " All will be explained if you will come . " Davos rose to his feet . " If I should die, I beseech my lord to see that my letters are delivered . " " You have my word on that … though if you die, it will not be at Glover ' s hands, nor Lord Wyman ' s . Quickly now, with me . " Glover led him along a darkened hall and down a flight of worn steps . They crossed the castle ' s godswood, where the heart tree had grown so huge and tangled that it had choked out all the oaks and elms and birch and sent its thick, pale limbs crashing through the walls and windows that looked down on it . Its roots were as thick around as a man ' s waist, its trunk so wide that the face carved into it looked fat and angry . Beyond the weirwood, Glover opened a rusted iron gate and paused to light a torch . When it was blazing red and hot, he took Davos down more steps into a barrel-vaulted cellar where the weeping walls were crusted white with salt, and seawater sloshed beneath their feet with every step . They passed through several cellars, and rows of small, damp, foul-smelling cells very different from the room where Davos had been confined . Then there was a blank stone wall that turned when Glover pushed on it . Beyond was a long narrow tunnel and still more steps . These led up. " Where are we? " asked Davos as they climbed . His words echoed faintly though the darkness. " The steps beneath the steps . The passage runs beneath the Castle Stair up to the New Castle . A secret way . It would not do for you to be seen, my lord . You are supposed to be dead . " Porridge for the dead man . Davos climbed. They emerged through another wall, but this one was lath and plaster on the far side . The room beyond was snug and warm and comfortably furnished, with a Myrish carpet on the floor and beeswax candles burning on a table . Davos could hear pipes and fiddles playing, not far away . On the wall hung a sheepskin with a map of the north painted across it in faded colors . Beneath the map sat Wyman Manderly, the colossal Lord of White Harbor. " Please sit . " Lord Manderly was richly garbed . His velvet doublet was a soft blue-green, embroidered with golden thread at hem and sleeves and collar . His mantle was ermine, pinned at the shoulder with a golden trident . " Are you hungry? " " No, my lord . Your gaolers have fed me well . " " There is wine, if you have a thirst . " " I will treat with you, my lord . My king commanded that of me . I do not have to drink with you . " Lord Wyman sighed . " I have treated you most shamefully, I know . I had my reasons, but … please, sit and drink, I beg you . Drink to my boy ' s safe return . Wylis, my eldest son and heir . He is home . That is the welcoming feast you hear . In the Merman ' s Court they are eating lamprey pie and venison with roasted chestnuts . Wynafryd is dancing with the Frey she is to marry . The other Freys are raising cups of wine to toast our friendship . " Beneath the music, Davos could hear the murmur of many voices, the clatter of cups and platters . He said nothing. I have just come from the high table, Lord Wyman went on . I have eaten too much, as ever, and all White Harbor knows my bowels are bad . My friends of Frey will not question a lengthy visit to the privy, we hope . He turned his cup over . There . You will drink and I will not . Sit . Time is short, and there is much we need to say . Robett, wine for the Hand, if you will be so good . Lord Davos, you will not know, but you are dead. Robett Glover filled a wine cup and offered it to Davos . He took it, sniffed it, drank . " How did I die, if I may ask? " " By the axe . Your head and hands were mounted above the Seal Gate, with your face turned so your eyes looked out across the harbor . By now you are well rotted, though we dipped your head in tar before we set it upon the spike . Carrion crows and seabirds squabbled over your eyes, they say . " Davos shifted uncomfortably . It was a queer feeling, being dead . " If it please my lord, who died in my place? " " Does it matter? You have a common face, Lord Davos . I hope my saying so does not offend you . The man had your coloring, a nose of the same shape, two ears that were not dissimilar, a long beard that could be trimmed and shaped like yours . You can be sure we tarred him well, and the onion shoved between his teeth served to twist the features . Ser Bartimus saw that the fingers of his left hand were shortened, the same as yours . The man was a criminal, if that gives you any solace . His dying may accomplish more good than anything he ever did whilst living . My lord, I bear you no ill will . The rancor I showed you in the Merman ' s Court was a mummer ' s farce put on to please our friends of Frey . " " My lord should take up a life of mummery, " said Davos . " You and yours were most convincing . Your good-daughter seemed to want me dead most earnestly, and the little girl … " Wylla . Lord Wyman smiled . Did you see how brave she was? Even when I threatened to have her tongue out, she reminded me of the debt White Harbor owes to the Starks of Winterfell, a debt that can never be repaid . Wylla spoke from the heart, as did Lady Leona . Forgive her if you can, my lord . She is a foolish, frightened woman, and Wylis is her life . Not every man has it in him to be Prince Aemon the Dragonknight or Symeon Star-Eyes, and not every woman can be as brave as my Wylla and her sister Wynafryd … who did know, yet played her own part fearlessly. When treating with liars, even an honest man must lie . I did not dare defy King ' s Landing so long as my last living son remained a captive . Lord Tywin Lannister wrote me himself to say that he had Wylis . If I would have him freed unharmed, he told me, I must repent my treason, yield my city, declare my loyalty to the boy king on the Iron Throne … and bend my knee to Roose Bolton, his Warden of the North . Should I refuse, Wylis would die a traitor ' s death, White Harbor would be stormed and sacked, and my people would suffer the same fate as the Reynes of Castamere. " I am fat, and many think that makes me weak and foolish . Mayhaps Tywin Lannister was one such . I sent him back a raven to say that I would bend my knee and open my gates after my son was returned, but not before . There the matter stood when Tywin died . Afterward the Freys turned up with Wendel ' s bones … to make a peace and seal it with a marriage pact, they claimed, but I was not about to give them what they wanted until I had Wylis, safe and whole, and they were not about to give me Wylis until I proved my loyalty . Your arrival gave me the means to do that . That was the reason for the discourtesy I showed you in the Merman ' s Court, and for the head and hands rotting above the Seal Gate . " " You took a great risk, my lord, " Davos said . " If the Freys had seen through your deception … " " I took no risk at all . If any of the Freys had taken it upon themselves to climb my gate for a close look at the man with the onion in his mouth, I would have blamed my gaolers for the error and produced you to appease them . " Davos felt a shiver up his spine . " I see . " " I hope so . You have sons of your own, you said . " Three, thought Davos, though I fathered seven. Soon I must return to the feast to toast my friends of Frey, Manderly continued . They watch me, ser . Day and night their eyes are on me, noses sniffing for some whiff of treachery . You saw them, the arrogant Ser Jared and his nephew Rhaegar, that smirking worm who wears a dragon ' s name . Behind them both stands Symond, clinking coins . That one has bought and paid for several of my servants and two of my knights . One of his wife ' s handmaids has found her way into the bed of my own fool . If Stannis wonders that my letters say so little, it is because I dare not even trust my maester . Theomore is all head and no heart . You heard him in my hall . Maesters are supposed to put aside old loyalties when they don their chains, but I cannot forget that Theomore was born a Lannister of Lannisport and claims some distant kinship to the Lannisters of Casterly Rock . Foes and false friends are all around me, Lord Davos . They infest my city like roaches, and at night I feel them crawling over me . The fat man ' s fingers coiled into a fist, and all his chins trembled . My son Wendel came to the Twins a guest . He ate Lord Walder ' s bread and salt, and hung his sword upon the wall to feast with friends . And they murdered him . Murdered, I say, and may the Freys choke upon their fables . I drink with Jared, jape with Symond, promise Rhaegar the hand of my own beloved granddaughter … but never think that means I have forgotten . The north remembers, Lord Davos . The north remembers, and the mummer ' s farce is almost done . My son is home. Something about the way Lord Wyman said that chilled Davos to the bone . " If it is justice that you want, my lord, look to King Stannis . No man is more just . " Robett Glover broke in to add, " Your loyalty does you honor, my lord, but Stannis Baratheon remains your king, not our own . " " Your own king is dead, " Davos reminded them, " murdered at the Red Wedding beside Lord Wyman ' s son . " " The Young Wolf is dead, " Manderly allowed, " but that brave boy was not Lord Eddard ' s only son . Robett, bring the lad . " " At once, my lord . " Glover slipped out the door. The lad? Was it possible that one of Robb Stark ' s brothers had survived the ruin of Winterfell? Did Manderly have a Stark heir hidden away in his castle? A found boy or a feigned boy? The north would rise for either, he suspected … but Stannis Baratheon would never make common cause with an imposter. The lad who followed Robett Glover through the door was not a Stark, nor could he ever hope to pass for one . He was older than the Young Wolf ' s murdered brothers, fourteen or fifteen by the look of him, and his eyes were older still . Beneath a tangle of dark brown hair his face was almost feral, with a wide mouth, sharp nose, and pointed chin . " Who are you? " Davos asked. The boy looked to Robett Glover. " He is a mute, but we have been teaching him his letters . He learns quickly . " Glover drew a dagger from his belt and gave it to the boy . " Write your name for Lord Seaworth . " There was no parchment in the chamber . The boy carved the letters into a wooden beam in the wall . W … E … X . He leaned hard into the X . When he was done he flipped the dagger in the air, caught it, and stood admiring his handiwork. " Wex is ironborn . He was Theon Greyjoy ' s squire . Wex was at Winterfell . " Glover sat . " How much does Lord Stannis know of what transpired at Winterfell? " Davos thought back on the tales they ' d heard . " Winterfell was captured by Theon Greyjoy, who had once been Lord Stark ' s ward . He had Stark ' s two young sons put to death and mounted their heads above the castle walls . When the northmen came to oust him, he put the entire castle to sword, down to the last child, before he himself was slain by Lord Bolton ' s bastard . " " Not slain, " said Glover . " Captured, and carried back to the Dreadfort . The Bastard has been flaying him . " Lord Wyman nodded . " The tale you tell is one we all have heard, as full of lies as a pudding ' s full of raisins . It was the Bastard of Bolton who put Winterfell to the sword … Ramsay Snow, he was called then, before the boy king made him a Bolton . Snow did not kill them all . He spared the women, roped them together, and marched them to the Dreadfort for his sport . " " His sport? " " He is a great hunter, " said Wyman Manderly, " and women are his favorite prey . He strips them naked and sets them loose in the woods . They have a half day ' s start before he sets out after them with hounds and horns . From time to time some wench escapes and lives to tell the tale . Most are less fortunate . When Ramsay catches them he rapes them, flays them, feeds their corpses to his dogs, and brings their skins back to the Dreadfort as trophies . If they have given him good sport, he slits their throats before he skins them . Elsewise, t ' other way around . " Davos paled . " Gods be good . How could any man— " " The evil is in his blood, " said Robett Glover . " He is a bastard born of rape . A Snow, no matter what the boy king says . " " Was ever snow so black? " asked Lord Wyman . " Ramsay took Lord Hornwood ' s lands by forcibly wedding his widow, then locked her in a tower and forgot her . It is said she ate her own fingers in her extremity … and the Lannister notion of king ' s justice is to reward her killer with Ned Stark ' s little girl . " " The Boltons have always been as cruel as they were cunning, but this one seems a beast in human skin, " said Glover. The Lord of White Harbor leaned forward . " The Freys are no better . They speak of wargs and skinchangers and assert that it was Robb Stark who slew my Wendel . The arrogance of it! They do not expect the north to believe their lies, not truly, but they think we must pretend to believe or die . Roose Bolton lies about his part in the Red Wedding, and his bastard lies about the fall of Winterfell . And yet so long as they held Wylis I had no choice but to eat all this excrement and praise the taste . " " And now, my lord? " asked Davos. He had hoped to hear Lord Wyman say, And now I shall declare for King Stannis, but instead the fat man smiled an odd, twinkling smile and said, " And now I have a wedding to attend . I am too fat to sit a horse, as any man with eyes can plainly see . As a boy I loved to ride, and as a young man I handled a mount well enough to win some small acclaim in the lists, but those days are done . My body has become a prison more dire than the Wolf ' s Den . Even so, I must go to Winterfell . Roose Bolton wants me on my knees, and beneath the velvet courtesy he shows the iron mail . I shall go by barge and litter, attended by a hundred knights and my good friends from the Twins . The Freys came here by sea . They have no horses with them, so I shall present each of them with a palfrey as a guest gift . Do hosts still give guest gifts in the south? " " Some do, my lord . On the day their guest departs . " " Perhaps you understand, then . " Wyman Manderly lurched ponderously to his feet . " I have been building warships for more than a year . Some you saw, but there are as many more hidden up the White Knife . Even with the losses I have suffered, I still command more heavy horse than any other lord north of the Neck . My walls are strong, and my vaults are full of silver . Oldcastle and Widow ' s Watch will take their lead from me . My bannermen include a dozen petty lords and a hundred landed knights . I can deliver King Stannis the allegiance of all the lands east of the White Knife, from Widow ' s Watch and Ramsgate to the Sheepshead Hills and the headwaters of the Broken Branch . All this I pledge to do if you will meet my price . " " I can bring your terms to the king, but— " Lord Wyman cut him off . " If you will meet my price, I said . Not Stannis . It ' s not a king I need but a smuggler . " Robett Glover took up the tale . " We may never know all that happened at Winterfell, when Ser Rodrik Cassel tried to take the castle back from Theon Greyjoy ' s ironmen . The Bastard of Bolton claims that Greyjoy murdered Ser Rodrik during a parley . Wex says no . Until he learns more letters we will never know half the truth … but he came to us knowing yes and no, and those can go a long way once you find the right questions . " " It was the Bastard who murdered Ser Rodrik and the men of Winterfell, " said Lord Wyman . " He slew Greyjoy ' s ironmen as well . Wex saw men cut down trying to yield . When we asked how he escaped, he took a chunk of chalk and drew a tree with a face . " Davos thought about that . " The old gods saved him? " " After a fashion . He climbed the heart tree and hid himself amongst the leaves . Bolton ' s men searched the godswood twice and killed the men they found there, but none thought to clamber up into the trees . Is that how it happened, Wex? " The boy flipped up Glover ' s dagger, caught it, nodded. Glover said, " He stayed up in the tree a long time . He slept amongst the branches, not daring to descend . Finally he heard voices down beneath him . " " The voices of the dead, " said Wyman Manderly. Wex held up five fingers, tapped each one with the dagger, then folded four away and tapped the last again. " Six of them, " asked Davos . " There were six . " " Two of them Ned Stark ' s murdered sons . " " How could a mute tell you that? " " With chalk . He drew two boys … and two wolves . " " The lad is ironborn, so he thought it best not to show himself, " said Glover . " He listened . The six did not linger long amongst the ruins of Winterfell . Four went one way, two another . Wex stole after the two, a woman and a boy . He must have stayed downwind, so the wolf would not catch his scent . " " He knows where they went, " Lord Wyman said. Davos understood . " You want the boy . " " Roose Bolton has Lord Eddard ' s daughter . To thwart him White Harbor must have Ned ' s son … and the direwolf . The wolf will prove the boy is who we say he is, should the Dreadfort attempt to deny him . That is my price, Lord Davos . Smuggle me back my liege lord, and I will take Stannis Baratheon as my king . " Old instinct made Davos Seaworth reach for his throat . His fingerbones had been his luck, and somehow he felt he would have need of luck to do what Wyman Manderly was asking of him . The bones were gone, though, so he said, " You have better men than me in your service . Knights and lords and maesters . Why would you need a smuggler? You have ships . " " Ships, " Lord Wyman agreed, " but my crews are rivermen, or fisherfolk who have never sailed beyond the Bite . For this I must have a man who ' s sailed in darker waters and knows how to slip past dangers, unseen and unmolested . " " Where is the boy? " Somehow Davos knew he would not like the answer . " Where is it you want me to go, my lord? " Robett Glover said, " Wex . Show him . " The mute flipped the dagger, caught it, then flung it end over end at the sheepskin map that adorned Lord Wyman ' s wall . It struck quivering . Then he grinned. For half a heartbeat Davos considered asking Wyman Manderly to send him back to the Wolf ' s Den, to Ser Bartimus with his tales and Garth with his lethal ladies . In the Den even prisoners ate porridge in the morning . But there were other places in this world where men were known to break their fast on human flesh. The sun had broken through near midday, after seven days of dark skies and snow flurries . Some of the drifts were higher than a man, but the stewards had been shoveling all day and the paths were as clean as they were like to get . Reflections glimmered off the Wall, every crack and crevice glittering pale blue. Seven hundred feet up, Jon Snow stood looking down upon the haunted forest . A north wind swirled through the trees below, sending thin white plumes of snow crystals flying from the highest branches, like icy banners . Elsewise nothing moved . Not a sign of life . That was not entirely reassuring . It was not the living that he feared . Even so … The sun is out . The snow has stopped . It may be a moon ' s turn before we have another chance as good . It may be a season . " Have Emmett assemble his recruits, " he told Dolorous Edd . " We ' ll want an escort . Ten rangers, armed with dragonglass . I want them ready to leave within the hour . " " Aye, m ' lord . And to command? " " That would be me . " Edd ' s mouth turned down even more than usual . " Some might think it better if the lord commander stayed safe and warm south of the Wall . Not that I ' d say such myself, but some might . " Jon smiled [BOS] Some had best not say so in my presence . [EOS]  A sudden gust of wind set Edd ' s cloak to flapping noisily . " Best go down, m ' lord . This wind ' s like to push us off the Wall, and I never did learn the knack of flying . " They rode the winch lift back to the ground . The wind was gusting, cold as the breath of the ice dragon in the tales Old Nan had told when Jon was a boy . The heavy cage was swaying . From time to time it scraped against the Wall, starting small crystalline showers of ice that sparkled in the sunlight as they fell, like shards of broken glass. Glass, Jon mused, might be of use here . Castle Black needs its own glass gardens, like the ones at Winterfell . We could grow vegetables even in the deep of winter . The best glass came from Myr, but a good clear pane was worth its weight in spice, and green and yellow glass would not work as well . What we need is gold . With enough coin, we could buy ‘ prentice glassblowers and glaziers in Myr, bring them north, offer them their freedom for teaching their art to some of our recruits . That would be the way to go about it . If we had the gold . Which we do not. At the base of the Wall he found Ghost rolling in a snowbank . The big white direwolf seemed to love fresh snow . When he saw Jon he bounded back onto his feet and shook himself off . Dolorous Edd said, " He ' s going with you? " " He is . " " A clever wolf, him . And me? " " You ' re not . " " A clever lord, you . Ghost ' s the better choice . I don ' t have the teeth for biting wildlings anymore . " " If the gods are good, we won ' t encounter any wildlings . I ' ll want the grey gelding . " Word spread fast at Castle Black . Edd was still saddling the grey when Bowen Marsh stomped across the yard to confront Jon at the stables . " My lord, I wish you would reconsider . The new men can take their vows in the sept as easily . " " The sept is home to the new gods . The old gods live in the wood, and those who honor them say their words amongst the weirwoods . You know that as well as I . "