Jon wondered . [BOS] What about water, my lord? [EOS] 
Ygritte watched and said nothing . She was older than he ' d thought at first, Jon realized; maybe as old as twenty, but short for her age, bandy-legged, with a round face, small hands, and a pug nose . Her shaggy mop of red hair stuck out in all directions . She looked plump as she crouched there, but most of that was layers of fur and wool and leather . Underneath all that she could be as skinny as Arya.
Good, Mormont said . We ' ve seen the dead come back, you and me, and it ' s not something I care to see again . He ate the egg in two bites and flicked a bit of shell out from between his teeth . Your brother is in the field with all the power of the north behind him . Any one of his lords bannermen commands more swords than you ' ll find in all the Night ' s Watch . Why do you imagine that they need your help? Are you such a mighty warrior, or do you carry a grumkin in your pocket to magic up your sword?
Be troubled, said Jon, and keep my vows.
I ' m fat, not blind, Samwell Tarly said . Of course I saw it, it ' s seven hundred feet high . Yet he stood up all the same, wrapped a fur-lined cloak over his shoulders, and followed Jon from the common hall, still wary, as if he suspected some cruel trick was waiting for him in the night . Ghost padded along beside them . I never thought it would be like this, Sam said as they walked, his words steaming in the cold air . Already he was huffing and puffing as he tried to keep up . All the buildings are falling down, and it ' s so … so …
Jon was in no mood for anyone ' s counsel . [BOS] What do you know about being a bastard? [EOS] 
Yes, he said.
The old man is Lord Commander of the Night ' s Watch, Sam reminded him . You ' ll be with him day and night . Yes, you ' ll pour his wine and see that his bed linen is fresh, but you ' ll also take his letters, attend him at meetings, squire for him in battle . You ' ll be as close to him as his shadow . You ' ll know everything, be a part of everything … and the Lord Steward said Mormont asked for you himself!
And me, said Jon Snow.
Even before Jon stood and shook it out, he knew what he had: the black cloak of a Sworn Brother of the Night ' s Watch.
Yes . Jon thought of Gilly . She and her sisters . They were nineteen, and Craster was one, but . . .
The wildling king studied his face . Who had the command here? And tell me true . Was it Rykker? Smallwood? Not Wythers, he ' s too feeble . Whose tent was this?
That was too much . Jon wrenched free of his friends and retreated to the armory, alone . His ears were still ringing from the blow Emmett had dealt him . He sat on the bench and buried his head in his hands . Why am I so angry? he asked himself, but it was a stupid question . Lord of Winterfell . I could be the Lord of Winterfell . My father ' s heir.
Gut him . That was Rattleshirt, still ahorse . The eagle flew to him and perched atop his bony helm, screeching.
And then he heard the laughter, sharp and cruel as a whip, and the voice of Ser Alliser Thorne . Not only a bastard, but a traitor ' s bastard, he was telling the men around him.
Slow as honey on a cold morning, the rangers swept down on the wildling camp, picking their way through clumps of gorse and stands of trees, over roots and rocks . Wildlings flew to meet them, shouting war cries and waving clubs and bronze swords and axes made of flint, galloping headlong at their ancient enemies . A shout, a slash, and a fine brave death, Jon had heard brothers say of the free folk ' s way of fighting.
Let him die, insisted the Lord of Bones . The black crow is a tricksy bird . I trust him not.
The dwarf lifted an eyebrow . Would you rather be called the Imp? Let them see that their words can cut you, and you ' ll never be free of the mockery . If they want to give you a name, take it, make it your own . Then they can ' t hurt you with it anymore . He gestured with his stick . Come, walk with me . They ' ll be serving some vile stew in the common hall by now, and I could do with a bowl of something hot.
Yes . Donal was the last . Noye ' s sword was sunk deep in the giant ' s throat, halfway to the hilt . The armorer had always seemed such a big man to Jon, but locked in the giant ' s massive arms he looked almost like a child . The giant crushed his spine . I don ' t know who died first . He took the lantern and moved forward for a better look . Mag . I am the last of the giants . He could feel the sadness there, but he had no time for sadness . It was Mag the Mighty . The king of the giants.
A half brother, he admitted . I ' m Ned Stark ' s bastard . My brother Robb is the King in the North . Why are you here?
I should have tried to kill Mance Rayder on the Fist, even if it meant my life . That was what Qhorin Halfhand would have done . But Jon had hesitated, and the chance passed . The next day he had ridden off with Styr the Magnar, Jarl, and more than a hundred picked Thenns and raiders . He told himself that he was only biding his time, that when the moment came he would slip away and ride for Castle Black . The moment never came . They rested most nights in empty wildling villages, and Styr always set a dozen of his Thenns to guard the horses . Jarl watched him suspiciously . And Ygritte was never far, day or night.
Jon teased . [BOS] Can ' t you guess? Your very favorite thing . [EOS] 
No, she said . There ' s nothing behind us . The look she gave him was sad . By now Mance is well down the Milkwater, marching on your Wall.
Jon drove him backward, attacking with every blow, keeping the older boy on the heels . Know your foe, Ser Rodrik had taught him once; Jon knew Halder, brutally strong but short of patience, with no taste for defense . Frustrate him, and he would leave himself open, as certain as sunset.
Edd cut three thick slices off a stale round of oat bread, stacked them on a wooden platter, covered them with bacon and bacon drippings, and filled a bowl with hard-cooked eggs . Jon took the bowl in one hand and the platter in the other and backed into the Lord Commander ' s tent.
The hushed silence seemed to stretch on and on . From where Jon crouched, he could see the legs of their horses through the branches . Finally Pyp spoke up . What did you hear?
Mormont beckoned him closer . Send him here after he ' s eaten . Have him bring quill and parchment . And find Tollett as well . Tell him to bring my axe . A guest gift for our host.
The cleft in the rock was barely large enough for man and horse to pass, but beyond, the walls opened up and the floor turned to soft sand . Jon could feel the spray freezing in his beard . Ghost burst through the waterfall in an angry rush, shook droplets from his fur, sniffed at the darkness suspiciously, then lifted a leg against one rocky wall . Qhorin had already dismounted . Jon did the same . You knew this place was here.
The woman had a terrible temper, and she put up quite the fight when I laid hands on her . It was all I could do to carry her home and get her out o ' them furs, but when I did, oh, she was hotter even than I remembered, and we had a fine old time, and then I went to sleep . Next morning when I woke the snow had stopped and the sun was shining, but I was in no fit state to enjoy it . All ripped and torn I was, and half me member bit right off, and there on me floor was a she-bear ' s pelt . And soon enough the free folk were telling tales o ' this bald bear seen in the woods, with the queerest pair o ' cubs behind her . Har! He slapped a meaty thigh . Would that I could find her again . She was fine to lay with, that bear . Never was a woman gave me such a fight, nor such strong sons neither.
That old man? Harma ' s tone said she did not believe it . He came himself? Then who commands at Castle Black?
As he watched his uncle lead his horse into the tunnel, Jon had remembered the things that Tyrion Lannister told him on the kingsroad, and in his mind ' s eye he saw Ben Stark lying dead, his blood red on the snow . The thought made him sick . What was he becoming? Afterward he sought out Ghost in the loneliness of his cell, and buried his face in his thick white fur.
The Magnar was not pleased . What do I want with a crow?
He found Ghost atop the hill, as he thought he might . The white wolf never howled, yet something drew him to the heights all the same, and he would squat there on his hindquarters, hot breath rising in a white mist as his red eyes drank the stars.
There was smoke rising from the chimney of the armory, though; only a wisp, almost invisible against the grey northern sky, but it was enough . Jon dismounted and limped toward it . Warmth poured out the open door like the hot breath of summer . Within, one-armed Donal Noye was working his bellows at the fire . He looked up at the noise . Jon Snow?
And he was finding that he had a man ' s thirst, to the raucous delight of the youths around him, who urged him on every time he drained a glass . They were fine company, and Jon relished the stories they were telling, tales of battle and bedding and the hunt . He was certain that his companions were more entertaining than the king ' s offspring . He had sated his curiosity about the visitors when they made their entrance . The procession had passed not a foot from the place he had been given on the bench, and Jon had gotten a good long look at them all.
Ygritte wanted me to be a wildling . Stannis wants me to be the Lord of Winterfell . But what do I want? The sun crept down the sky to dip behind the Wall where it curved through the western hills . Jon watched as that towering expanse of ice took on the reds and pinks of sunset . Would I sooner be hanged for a turncloak by Lord Janos, or forswear my vows, marry Val, and become the Lord of Winterfell? It seemed an easy choice when he thought of it in those terms . . . though if Ygritte had still been alive, it might have been even easier . Val was a stranger to him . She was not hard on the eyes, certainly, and she had been sister to Mance Rayder ' s queen, but still . . .
Ygritte had looked so angry he thought she was about to strike him . All of us, she said . You too . You ' re no crow now, Jon Snow . I swore you weren ' t, so you better not be . She pushed him back against the trunk of a tree and kissed him, full on the lips right there in the midst of the ragged column . Jon heard Grigg the Goat urging her on . Someone else laughed . He kissed her back despite all that . When they finally broke apart, Ygritte was flushed . You ' re mine, she whispered . Mine, as I ' m yours . And if we die, we die . All men must die, Jon Snow . But first we ' ll live.
She told you true.
He found Ygritte sprawled across a patch of old snow beneath the Lord Commander ' s Tower, with an arrow between her breasts . The ice crystals had settled over her face, and in the moonlight it looked as though she wore a glittering silver mask.
The Old Bear gave a loud snort, and the raven took flight, flapping in a circle about the room . Give me a man for every vow I ' ve seen broken and the Wall will never lack for defenders.
When his eyelids fluttered open, he was wrapped in thick wool and floating . He could not seem to move, but that did not matter . For a time he dreamed that Ygritte was with him, tending him with gentle hands . Finally he closed his eyes and slept.
When I was no older than you, I heard a brother tell how he followed a shadowcat through these falls . He unsaddled his horse, removed her bit and bridle, and ran his fingers through her shaggy mane . There is a way through the heart of the mountain . Come dawn, if they have not found us, we will press on . The first watch is mine, brother . Qhorin seated himself on the sand, his back to a wall, no more than a vague black shadow in the gloom of the cave . Over the rush of falling waters, Jon heard a soft sound of steel on leather that could only mean that the Halfhand had drawn his sword.
He almost rode through Mole ' s Town, so feverish that he did not know where he was . Most of the village was hidden underground, only a handful of small hovels to be seen by the light of the waning moon . The brothel was a shed no bigger than a privy, its red lantern creaking in the wind, a bloodshot eye peering through the blackness . Jon dismounted at the adjoining stable, half-stumbling from the mare ' s back as he shouted two boys awake . I need a fresh mount, with saddle and bridle, he told them, in a tone that brooked no argument . They brought him that; a skin of wine as well, and half a loaf of brown bread . Wake the village, he told them . Warn them . There are wildlings south of the Wall . Gather your goods and make for Castle Black . He pulled himself onto the black gelding they ' d given him, gritting his teeth at the pain in his leg, and rode hard for the north.
It ' s as heavy as it needs to be to stop a sword, Jon said . Now get it up . He stepped forward, slashing . Satin jerked the shield up in time to catch the sword on its rim, and swung his own blade at Jon ' s ribs . Good, Jon said, when he felt the impact on his own shield . That was good . But you need to put your body into it . Get your weight behind the steel and you ' ll do more damage than with arm strength alone . Come, try it again, drive at me, but keep the shield up or I ' ll ring your head like a bell . . .
The stewards! For a moment Jon could not believe what he had heard . Mormont must have read it wrong . He started to rise, to open his mouth, to tell them there had been a mistake … and then he saw Ser Alliser studying him, eyes shiny as two flakes of obsidian, and he knew.
Tormund Thunderfist cracked a gap-toothed smile . He asked me if that was my daughter riding there beside me, with her smooth pink cheeks . The wildling shook snow from his arm and turned his horse about . It may be he never saw a man without a beard before . Come, we start back . Mance grows sore wroth when I ' m not found in my accustomed place.
The clang of steel echoed through the yard as the others joined battle around him . Jon blocked a savage cut at his head, the shock of impact running up his arm as the swords crashed together . He slammed a sidestroke into Halder ' s ribs, and was rewarded with a muffled grunt of pain . The counterstroke caught Jon on the shoulder . Chainmail crunched, and pain flared up his neck, but for an instant Halder was unbalanced . Jon cut his left leg from under him, and he fell with a curse and a crash.
Was it you killed her?
Tyrion Lannister sat across from him, sniffing at the stew suspiciously . Barley, onion, carrot, he muttered . Someone should tell the cooks that turnip isn ' t a meat.
Even now, he did not know if he was doing the honorable thing . The southron had it easier . They had their septons to talk to, someone to tell them the gods ' will and help sort out right from wrong . But the Starks worshiped the old gods, the nameless gods, and if the heart trees heard, they did not speak.
Jon had never heard this tale before . [BOS] Which Brandon was this supposed to be? Brandon the Builder lived in the Age of Heroes, thousands of years before Bael . There was Brandon the Burner and his father Brandon the Shipwright, but— [EOS] 
They do not plan to climb the Wall nor to burrow beneath it, my lord . They plan to break it.
Jon pushed forward . [BOS] Sam Tarly can . Sam loves maps . [EOS] 
The kettle was in the corner by the hearth, a big black potbellied thing with two huge handles and a heavy lid . Maester Aemon said a word to Sam and Clydas and they went and grabbed the handles and dragged the kettle over to the table . A few of the brothers were already queueing up by the token barrels as Clydas took the lid off and almost dropped it on his foot . With a raucous scream and a clap of wings, a huge raven burst out of the kettle . It flapped upward, seeking the rafters perhaps, or a window to make its escape, but there were no rafters in the vault, nor windows either . The raven was trapped . Cawing loudly, it circled the hall, once, twice, three times . And Jon heard Samwell Tarly shout, I know that bird! That ' s Lord Mormont ' s raven!
Cold? A hard frost was settling over the castle, and Jon could hear the soft crunch of grey weeds beneath his boots.
I ' d hoped he chose the mountains to hide his muster from the eyes of my rangers.
Tormund spoke truly, said Mance Rayder as he ripped apart a loaf of bread . The black crow is a tricksy bird, that ' s so . . . but I was a crow when you were no bigger than the babe in Dalla ' s belly, Jon Snow . So take care not to play tricksy with me.
I ' ll bring him, my lord . The men from the Shadow Tower had been expected days ago . When they had not appeared, the brothers had begun to wonder . Jon had heard gloomy mutterings around the cookfire, and not just from Dolorous Edd . Ser Ottyn Wythers was for retreating to Castle Black as soon as possible . Ser Mallador Locke would strike for the Shadow Tower, hoping to pick up Qhorin ' s trail and learn what had befallen him . And Thoren Smallwood wanted to push on into the mountains . Mance Rayder knows he must battle the Watch, Thoren had declared, but he will never look for us so far north . If we ride up the Milkwater, we can take him unawares and cut his host to ribbons before he knows we are on him.
I remember.
The gods play cruel jests, Jon thought . Pyp and Toad, all a lather to be a part of the great ranging, were to remain at Castle Black . It was Samwell Tarly, the self-proclaimed coward, grossly fat, timid, and near as bad a rider as he was with a sword, who must face the haunted forest . The Old Bear was taking two cages of ravens, so they might send back word as they went . Maester Aemon was blind and far too frail to ride with them, so his steward must go in his place . We need you for the ravens, Sam . And someone has to help me keep Grenn humble.
Stannis turned to study him . Beneath his heavy brow were eyes like bottomless blue pools . His hollow cheeks and strong jaw were covered with a short-cropped blue-black beard that did little to conceal the gauntness of his face, and his teeth were clenched . His neck and shoulders were clenched as well, and his right hand . Jon found himself remembering something Donal Noye once said about the Baratheon brothers . Robert was the true steel . Stannis is pure iron, black and hard and strong, but brittle, the way iron gets . He ' ll break before he bends . Uneasily, he knelt, wondering why this brittle king had need of him.
Jon waited by the cold iron bars while Pyp went to Maester Aemon for the spare key . Surprisingly, the maester himself returned with him, and Clydas with a lantern . Come see me when we are done, the old man told Jon while Pyp was fumbling with the chains . I need to change your dressing and apply a fresh poultice, and you will want some more dreamwine for the pain.
Jon said sullenly . He did not care to talk of his father ' s death, not even to Mormont . [BOS] I remember, [EOS] 
I know you held the gate here, King Stannis said . If not, I would have come too late.
When morning came, none of them quite realized it at first . The world was still dark, but the black had turned to grey and shapes were beginning to emerge half-seen from the gloom . Jon lowered his bow to stare at the mass of heavy clouds that covered the eastern sky . He could see a glow behind them, but perhaps he was only dreaming . He notched another arrow.
Good . Craster ' s Keep is just ahead . If the gods are good, he ' ll let us sleep by his fire.
Jon remembered . [BOS] They say you forged his warhammer, [EOS] 
Lady Stark was watching . She had not raised a cry . Jon took that for acceptance . Outside the window, the direwolf howled again . The wolf that Bran had not had time to name.
Too hot, too noisy, and I ' d drunk too much wine, the dwarf told him . I learned long ago that it is considered rude to vomit on your brother . Might I have a closer look at your wolf?
Jon asked her . He did not know if he could face those heights again, or if his garron could survive a second crossing . [BOS] Will we return by the Skirling Pass? [EOS] 
When they emerged from under the trees, Mormont spurred his tough little garron to a trot . Ghost came streaking out from the woods to meet them, licking his chops, his muzzle red from prey . High above, the men on the Wall saw the column approaching . Jon heard the deep, throaty call of the watchman ' s great horn, calling out across the miles; a single long blast that shuddered through the trees and echoed off the ice.
Rattleshirt, Qhorin called down, icy-polite.
He shut the door and pulled the bell cord . The winch began to turn . They rose . The day was bright and the Wall was weeping, long fingers of water trickling down its face and glinting in the sun . In the close confines of the iron cage, he was acutely aware of the red woman ' s presence . She even smells red . The scent reminded him of Mikken ' s forge, of the way iron smelled when red-hot; the scent was smoke and blood . Kissed by fire, he thought, remembering Ygritte . The wind got in amongst Melisandre ' s long red robes and sent them flapping against Jon ' s legs as he stood beside her . You are not cold, my lady? he asked her.
The king poured himself as Dalla cut the well-crisped hens apart and brought them each a half . Jon peeled off his gloves and ate with his fingers, sucking every morsel of meat off the bones.
No sorc— he began, as a huge bolt of lightning stabbed down from the sky and touched the surface of the lake . For half a heartbeat the world was noonday bright . The clap of thunder was so loud that Ygritte gasped and covered her ears.
Maybe you could write an account of our ranging, Sam.
Then Pyp said, There ' s blood on the floor.
We shall see . In the leather chair behind the table where the Old Bear wrote his letters sat a big, broad, jowly man Jon did not know . Yes, we shall see, he said again . You will not deny that you are Jon Snow, I hope? Stark ' s bastard?
Sam? Jon called softly.
Jon said . He took a deep breath to gather his thoughts . [BOS] That ' s stupid, I remember once I asked Maester Luwin why he wore a chain around his throat . [EOS] 
No . The Aurochs lost.
If he must be alone, he would make solitude his armor . Castle Black had no godswood, only a small sept and a drunken septon, but Jon could not find it in him to pray to any gods, old or new . If they were real, he thought, they were as cruel and implacable as winter.
If I could fly, I ' d be back at Castle Black eating a pork pie, said Sam.
She put a hand over her belly . Wife now . Edging away from the wolf, she knelt mournfully beside the broken hutch . I was going to breed them rabbits . There ' s no sheep left.
A bastard name, he said . My father was Lord Eddard Stark of Winterfell.
What if we refuse the offer? Jon had no doubt that they would . The Old Bear might at least have listened, though he would have balked at the notion of letting thirty or forty thousand wildlings loose on the Seven Kingdoms . But Alliser Thorne and Janos Slynt would dismiss the notion out of hand.
Mance shook his head . The Others never come when the sun is up . Chariots were rattling across the killing ground, jammed with riders waving spears of sharpened bone . The king groaned . Where the bloody hell do they think they ' re going? Quenn, get those fools back where they belong . Someone bring my horse . The mare, not the stallion . I ' ll want my armor too . Mance glanced suspiciously at the Wall . Atop the icy parapets, the straw soldiers stood collecting arrows, but there was no sign of any other activity . Harma, mount up your raiders . Tormund, find your sons and give me a triple line of spears.
The round fat face looked up at him, suspicious . Why? What will we do outside?
Jon plucked a scroll from a bin, blew off the worst of the dust . A corner flaked off between his fingers as he unrolled it . [BOS] Mormont wanted those maps a little sooner than that . Look, this one is crumbling, [EOS] he said, frowning over the faded script.
Beyond that Wall lay the Seven Kingdoms, and everything he had sworn to protect . He had said the words, had pledged his life and honor, and by rights he should be up there standing sentry . He should be raising a horn to his lips to rouse the Night ' s Watch to arms . He had no horn, though . It would not be hard to steal one from the wildlings, he suspected, but what would that accomplish? Even if he blew it, there was no one to hear . The Wall was a hundred leagues long and the Watch sadly dwindled . All but three of the strongholds had been abandoned; there might not be a brother within forty miles of here, but for Jon . If he was a brother still . . .
He ' s staying to die, Jon realized.
The raven landed on the table nearest Jon . Snow, it cawed . It was an old bird, dirty and bedraggled . Snow, it said again, Snow, snow, snow . It walked to the end of the table, spread its wings again, and flew to Jon ' s shoulder.
He was finishing the last of the pork pie the cooks had served up for supper when Jon sat down across from him . The fat boy ' s eyes widened at the sight of Ghost . Is that a wolf?
The Magnar nodded . Even in far Thenn we know the tale of Arson Iceaxe and his tunnel.
If we are taken, you must yield.
Barrels of pitch were loaded hastily into the slings and set afire with a torch . The wind fanned the flames to a brisk red fury . NOW! Noye bellowed . The counterweights plunged downward, the throwing arms rose to thud against the padded crossbars . The burning pitch went tumbling through the darkness, casting an eerie flickering light upon the ground below . Jon caught a glimpse of mammoths moving ponderously through the half-light, and just as quickly lost them again . A dozen, maybe more . The barrels struck the earth and burst . They heard a deep bass trumpeting, and a giant roared something in the Old Tongue, his voice an ancient thunder that sent shivers up Jon ' s spine.
Jon pointed . [BOS] There . Gone to fight . [EOS] The king led his ragged wedge into a knot of rangers, his sword flashing.
Everyone laughed but Grenn . I hope I ' m a ranger.
We left him . Grenn sounded miserable . I shook him and screamed at him, even slapped his face . Giant tried to drag him to his feet, but he was too heavy . Remember in training how he ' d curl up on the ground and lie there whimpering? At Craster ' s he wouldn ' t even whimper . Dirk and Ollo were tearing up the walls looking for food, Garth and Garth were fighting, some of the others were raping Craster ' s wives . Dolorous Edd figured Dirk ' s bunch would kill all the loyal men to keep us from telling what they ' d done, and they had us two to one . We left Sam with the Old Bear . He wouldn ' t move, Jon.
And suddenly Ghost was back, stalking softly between two weirwoods . White fur and red eyes, Jon realized, disquieted . Like the trees …
Sam, have you taken leave of all your sense? We may not even return this way . And if we do, do you think the Old Bear is going to let you pack off one of Craster ' s wives?
If it please my lord, what would you have of King Renly?
Mance laughed . If so, our war is won . Bowen knows a deal more about counting swords than he ' s ever known about using them.
What ' s wrong with flowers?
Ser . She was no whore, ser . The Halfhand told me not to balk, whatever the wildlings asked of me, but . . . I will not deny that I went beyond what I had to do, that I . . . cared for her.
Qhorin swung down from his saddle . My men are hungry, and our horses require tending.
Sam ' s fat face blushed a deep red . On the way home . He could not meet Jon ' s eyes . She ' s going to have a baby.
Jon said . [BOS] A bastard can have honor too, I am ready to swear your oath . [EOS] 
Up ahead a hunting horn sounded a quavering note, half drowned beneath the constant patter of the rain . Buckwell ' s horn, the Old Bear announced . The gods are good; Craster ' s still there . His raven gave a single flap of his big wings, croaked Corn, and ruffled his feathers up again.
Do you mean to march on the Wall? When?
Nor had it drunk its fill . By sunset, two of the Thenns had fallen from the ladder to their deaths, but they were the last . It was near midnight before Jon reached the top . The stars were out again, and Ygritte was trembling from the climb . I almost fell, she said, with tears in her eyes . Twice . Thrice . The Wall was trying t ' shake me off, I could feel it . One of the tears broke free and trickled slowly down her cheek.
His hand froze . A girl.
No, said Qhorin, he is a man of the Night ' s Watch.
Beneath the dragonglass was an old warhorn, made from an auroch ' s horn and banded in bronze . Jon shook the dirt from inside it, and a stream of arrowheads fell out . He let them fall, and pulled up a corner of the cloth the weapons had been wrapped in, rubbing it between his fingers . Good wool, thick, a double weave, damp but not rotted . It could not have been long in the ground . And it was dark . He seized a handful and pulled it close to the torch . Not dark . Black.
I prayed for it, she said dully . He was my special boy . I went to the sept and prayed seven times to the seven faces of god that Ned would change his mind and leave him here with me . Sometimes prayers are answered.
I am no lord, sire . Jon rose . I know what you have heard . That I am a turncloak, and craven . That I slew my brother Qhorin Halfhand so the wildlings would spare my life . That I rode with Mance Rayder, and took a wildling wife.
There was a sheepfold, but no sheep.
When he entered the solar, Mormont ' s raven screamed at him . Corn! the bird shrieked . Corn! Corn! Corn!
A wildling arrow . It was not a question . Noye had only one arm, but that was thick with muscle . He slid it under Jon ' s to help support him . You ' re white as milk, and burning hot besides . I ' m taking you to Aemon.
Beneath the Wall, the queen ' s men were kindling their nightfire . He saw Melisandre emerge from the tunnel with the king beside her, to lead the prayers she believed would keep the dark away . Jon told the wolf . [BOS] Come, Ghost, With me . You ' re hungry, I know . I could feel it . [EOS] They ran together for the gate, circling wide around the nightfire, where reaching flames clawed at the black belly of the night.
In the dark? Stupid . If you didn ' t fall off your horse and break your neck, you ' d get lost and wind up back at the Wall when the sun came up.
It was hard to put into words . Jon stared down at his hands helplessly . [BOS] My father never used a headsman . He said he owed it to men he killed to look into their eyes and hear their last words . And when I looked into Ygritte ' s eyes, I . . . I know she was an enemy, but there was no evil in her . [EOS] 
The woman regarded them with nervous eyes . She was younger than he ' d thought at first . A girl of fifteen or sixteen years, he judged, dark hair plastered across a gaunt face by the falling rain, her bare feet muddy to the ankles . The body under the sewn skins was showing in the early turns of pregnancy . Are you one of Craster ' s daughters? he asked.
Jon could scarcely follow what he was saying . [BOS] My lord, I don ' t understand . What ' s happened to my father? [EOS] 
It was dark in the Skirling Pass . The great stone flanks of the mountains hid the sun for most of the day, so they rode in shadow, the breath of man and horse steaming in the cold air . Icy fingers of water trickled down from the snowpack above into small frozen pools that cracked and broke beneath the hooves of their garrons . Sometimes they would see a few weeds struggling from some crack in the rock or a splotch of pale lichen, but there was no grass, and they were above the trees now.
He could not see the smile . Hard as he tried, he could not see it . He found himself thinking of the deserter his father had beheaded the day they ' d found the direwolves . You said the words, Lord Eddard had told him . You took a vow, before your brothers, before the old gods and the new . Desmond and Fat Tom had dragged the man to the stump . Bran ' s eyes had been wide as saucers, and Jon had to remind him to keep his pony in hand . He remembered the look on Father ' s face when Theon Greyjoy brought forth Ice, the spray of blood on the snow, the way Theon had kicked the head when it came rolling at his feet.
Pyp hopped off his horse and looked at the lightening sky with disgust . Give us a hand bedding down the horses, Sam, the small boy said . We have a long day before us, and no sleep to face it on, thanks to Lord Snow.
Once the barrel was on its side, Jon grabbed a torch and waved it above the surface of the Wall, back and forth, just enough to melt the ice a little . The thin film of water helped the barrel roll more easily . Too easily, in fact; they almost lost it . But finally, with four of them pooling their efforts, they rolled their boulder to the edge and stood it up again.
Samwell Tarly must have read their thoughts on their faces . His eyes met Jon ' s and darted away, quick as frightened animals . I … I ' m sorry, he said . I don ' t mean to … to be like I am . He walked heavily toward the armory.
It was him I asked . Has he lost his tongue? Perhaps he should, to spare us further lies.
Die, the raven muttered, pacing along Mormont ' s shoulders . Die, die, die, die . The Old Bear sat slumped and silent, as if the burden of speech had grown too heavy for him to bear . But at last he said, May the gods forgive me . Choose your men.
Jon stared at Aemon ' s white eyes and wrinkled face . [BOS] No more? My brothers are at Winterfell . Bran and Rickon . . . [EOS] 
They had argued for many hours, and reached no agreement . The Old Bear was too stubborn to retreat, but neither would he rush headlong up the Milkwater, seeking battle . In the end, nothing had been decided but to wait a few more days for the men from the Shadow Tower, and talk again if they did not appear.
The old man laid a withered, spotted hand on his shoulder . It hurts, boy, he said softly . Oh, yes . Choosing … it has always hurt . And always will . I know.
And ride the rest of the day with wet clothes frozen to our skins? he objected.
Every night when they made camp, Ygritte threw her sleeping skins down beside his own, no matter if he was near the fire or well away from it . Once he woke to find her nestled against him, her arm across his chest . He lay listening to her breathe for a long time, trying to ignore the tension in his groin . Rangers often shared skins for warmth, but warmth was not all Ygritte wanted, he suspected . After that he had taken to using Ghost to keep her away . Old Nan used to tell stories about knights and their ladies who would sleep in a single bed with a blade between them for honor ' s sake, but he thought this must be the first time where a direwolf took the place of the sword.
Might be after we could come back here, and live in that tower, she said . Would you want that, Jon Snow? After?
East and north and northeast, he saw bands of wildlings trying to stand and fight, but the attackers rode right over them . The free folk still had the numbers, but the attackers had steel armor and heavy horses . In the thickest part of the fray, Jon saw Mance standing tall in his stirrups . His red-and-black cloak and raven-winged helm made him easy to pick out . He had his sword raised and men were rallying to him when a wedge of knights smashed into them with lance and sword and longaxe . Mance ' s mare went up on her hind legs, kicking, and a spear took her through the breast . Then the steel tide washed over him.
From that day forth, neither Rast nor any of the others would hurt Samwell Tarly . When Ser Alliser matched them against him, they would stand their ground and swat aside his slow, clumsy strokes . If the master-at-arms screamed for an attack, they would dance in and tap Sam lightly on breastplate or helm or leg . Ser Alliser raged and threatened and called them all cravens and women and worse, yet Sam remained unhurt . A few nights later, at Jon ' s urging, he joined them for the evening meal, taking a place on the bench beside Halder . It was another fortnight before he found the nerve to join their talk, but in time he was laughing at Pyp ' s faces and teasing Grenn with the best of them.
We might camp here tonight, Smallwood suggested.
So are they . Jon leaned his crutch up against a merlon and took up his longbow, bending the smooth thick Dornish yew to slip a bowstring through the notches . Don ' t waste a quarrel unless you know you have a good clean shot, he said when Satin returned from waking Dick . We have an ample supply up here, but ample doesn ' t mean inexhaustible . And step behind a merlon to reload, don ' t try and hide in back of a scarecrow . They ' re made of straw, an arrow will punch through them . He did not bother telling Dick Follard anything . Dick could read your lips if there was enough light and he gave a damn what you were saying, but he knew it all already.
Jon said . The Young Dragon was one of his heroes . [BOS] Daeren Targaryen was only fourteen when he conquered Dorne, [EOS] 
After that, Mormont rode in silence, brooding . Jon followed close behind him; as the Lord Commander ' s steward, that was his place . The day was grey, damp, overcast, the sort of day that made you wish for rain . No wind stirred the wood; the air hung humid and heavy, and Jon ' s clothes clung to his skin . It was warm . Too warm . The Wall was weeping copiously, had been weeping for days, and sometimes Jon even imagined it was shrinking.
Jon answered, his voice cooler than he felt . [BOS] I ' ll not fight a brother while we ' re beyond the Wall, [EOS] 
The Thenns were hardened warriors, and more disciplined than the common run of wildling; no doubt that was why Mance had chosen them . The defenders of Castle Black would include blind Maester Aemon and his half-blind steward Clydas, one-armed Donal Noye, drunken Septon Cellador, Deaf Dick Follard, Three-Finger Hobb the cook, old Ser Wynton Stout, as well as Halder and Toad and Pyp and Albett and the rest of the boys who ' d trained with Jon . And commanding them would be red-faced Bowen Marsh, the plump Lord Steward who had been made castellan in Lord Mormont ' s absence . Dolorous Edd sometimes called Marsh the Old Pomegranate, which fit him just as well as the Old Bear fit Mormont . He ' s the man you want in front when the foes are in the field, Edd would say in his usual dour voice . He ' ll count them right up for you . A regular demon for counting, that one.
When do these patrols go out? How often?
The battle? He watched the rangers scatter before Harma ' s bloody dog ' s head . The raiders screamed and hacked and chased the men in black back into the trees . But there were more men coming from the wood, a column of horse . Knights on heavy horse, Jon saw . Harma had to regroup and wheel to meet them, but half of her men had raced too far ahead.
Cursing, Mance swung up into the saddle . Varamyr, stay and see that no harm comes to Dalla . The King-beyond-the-Wall pointed his sword at Jon . And keep a few extra eyes on this crow . If he runs, rip out his throat.
Ben Jen, the raven squawked, bobbing its head, bits of egg dribbling from its beak . Ben Jen . Ben Jen.
Dareon helped Halder to his feet . The quarryman ' s son wrenched off his helm and threw it across the yard . For an instant, I thought I finally had you, Snow.
Qhorin came up beside him . A frozen river, you say?
Benjen Stark is still First Ranger, Jon Snow told him, toying with his bowl of blueberries . The rest might have given up all hope of his uncle ' s safe return, but not him . He pushed away the berries, scarcely touched, and rose from the bench.
We all saw how eager you were to take it, mocked Ragwyle.
Jon had to crawl a dozen paces before the cave opened up around him . When he stood again, it took his eyes a moment to adjust . Ygritte had brought a torch, but there was no other light . She stood beside a little waterfall that fell from a cleft in the rock down into a wide dark pool . The orange and yellow flames shone against the pale green water.
Craster ' s sheepskin jerkin and cloak of sewn skins made a shabby contrast, but around one thick wrist was a heavy ring that had the glint of gold . He looked to be a powerful man, though well into the winter of his days now, his mane of hair grey going to white . A flat nose and a drooping mouth gave him a cruel look, and one of his ears was missing . So this is a wildling . Jon remembered Old Nan ' s tales of the savage folk who drank blood from human skulls . Craster seemed to be drinking a thin yellow beer from a chipped stone cup . Perhaps he had not heard the stories.
Sam shook his head . No thank you, Jon.
Jon agreed . Even the words were an effort . [BOS] My leg, [EOS] 
We ' re sorry about your father, Grenn said, but it doesn ' t matter . Once you say the words, you can ' t leave, no matter what.
Jon told her . [BOS] So are you, I had Mikken make this special . The bravos use swords like this in Pentos and Myr and the other Free Cities . It won ' t hack a man ' s head off, but it can poke him full of holes if you ' re fast enough . [EOS] 
The call came drifting through the black of night . Jon pushed himself onto an elbow, his hand reaching for Longclaw by force of habit as the camp began to stir . The horn that wakes the sleepers, he thought.
After each day ' s march the Magnar summoned him to ask shrewd sharp questions about Castle Black, its garrison and defenses . Jon lied where he dared and feigned ignorance a few times, but Grigg the Goat and Errok listened as well, and they knew enough to make Jon careful . Too blatant a lie would betray him.
Part of him wanted only to flee, but he knew that if he did he might never see Bran again . He took a nervous step into the room . Please, he said.
No one needed to ask what it was . Nor did Jon need the maester ' s Myrish eye to see it creeping out from amongst the tents and trees . It doesn ' t really look much like a turtle, Satin commented . Turtles don ' t have fur.
the Dornishman ' s taken my life,
Would that I were . I will not deny that Bael ' s exploit inspired mine own . . . but I did not steal either of your sisters that I recall . Bael wrote his own songs, and lived them . I only sing the songs that better men have made . More mead?
Show them, commanded Rattleshirt.
It did not bear thinking about . Pain throbbed, deep in his fingers, as he clutched the reins . Jon put his heels into his horse and broke into a gallop, racing down the kingsroad, as if to outrun his doubts . Jon was not afraid of death, but he did not want to die like that, trussed and bound and beheaded like a common brigand . If he must perish, let it be with a sword in his hand, fighting his father ' s killers . He was no true Stark, had never been one … but he could die like one . Let them say that Eddard Stark had fathered four sons, not three.
Banners, he heard Varamyr murmur, I see golden banners, oh . . . A mammoth lumbered by, trumpeting, a half-dozen bowmen in the wooden tower on its back . The king . . . no . . .
The wind was blowing snow into Jon ' s eyes . He could feel the blood freezing on his face . Are we talking or riding?
We know, said Pyp . The sentries on the Wall have been told to keep one eye on the south, and Donal Noye dispatched some men to Weatherback Ridge to watch the kingsroad . Maester Aemon ' s sent birds to Eastwatch and the Shadow Tower too.
It was soon revealed that the new recruit had brought his own armor with him; padded doublet, boiled leather, mail and plate and helm, even a great wood-and-leather shield blazoned with the same striding huntsman he wore on his surcoat . As none of it was black, however, Ser Alliser insisted that he reequip himself from the armory . That took half the morning . His girth required Donal Noye to take apart a mail hauberk and refit it with leather panels at the sides . To get a helm over his head the armorer had to detach the visor . His leathers bound so tightly around his legs and under his arms that he could scarcely move . Dressed for battle, the new boy looked like an overcooked sausage about to burst its skin . Let us hope you are not as inept as you look, Ser Alliser said . Halder, see what Ser Piggy can do.
The Magnar shouted commands in the Old Tongue and a score of his Thenns spread out to establish a perimeter around the village, whilst others went prowling through the houses to make certain no one else was hiding amongst the weeds and tumbled stones . The rest crowded into the roofless inn, jostling each other to get closer to the hearth . The broken branches the old man had been burning seemed to generate more smoke than heat, but any warmth was welcome on such a wild rainy night . Two of the Thenns had thrown the man to the ground and were going through his things . Another held his horse, while three more looted his saddlebags.
The evening meal was almost done by the time he and Ghost reached the common hall . A group of the black brothers were dicing over mulled wine near the fire . His friends were at the bench nearest the west wall, laughing . Pyp was in the middle of a story . The mummer ' s boy with the big ears was a born liar with a hundred different voices, and he did not tell his tales so much as live them, playing all the parts as needed, a king one moment and a swineherd the next . When he turned into an alehouse girl or a virgin princess, he used a high falsetto voice that reduced them all to tears of helpless laughter, and his eunuchs were always eerily accurate caricatures of Ser Alliser . Jon took as much pleasure from Pyp ' s antics as anyone … yet that night he turned away and went instead to the end of the bench, where Samwell Tarly sat alone, as far from the others as he could get.
The armorer ' s breath was frosting as it blew from his broad, flat nose . North of the Wall was a sea of darkness that seemed to stretch forever . Jon could make out the faint red glimmer of distant fires moving through the wood . It was Mance, certain as sunrise . The Others did not light torches.
They know, Jon realized . My father is no traitor, he said hoarsely . Even the words stuck in his throat, as if to choke him . The wind was rising, and it seemed colder in the yard than it had when he ' d gone in . Spirit summer was drawing to an end.
He felt something scrabble at his ankle . Black fingers clawed at his calf . The arm was crawling up his leg, ripping at wool and flesh . Shouting with revulsion, Jon pried the fingers off his leg with the point of his sword and flipped the thing away . It lay writhing, fingers opening and closing.
Sam mopped at the sweat on his brow . You … you can see where Ghost … Jon ' s direwolf … you can see where he tore off that man ' s hand, and yet … the stump hasn ' t bled, look … He waved a hand . My father … L-lord Randyll, he, he made me watch him dress animals sometimes, when … after … Sam shook his head from side to side, his chins quivering . Now that he had looked at the bodies, he could not seem to look away . A fresh kill … the blood would still flow, my lords . Later … later it would be clotted, like a … a jelly, thick and … and … He looked as though he was going to be sick . This man … look at the wrist, it ' s all … crusty … dry … like …
The wildling blood is the blood of the First Men, the same blood that flows in the veins of the Starks . As to a crown, do you see one?
A blacksmith . He only had one arm.
The Lord of Ham thinks he ' s too good to eat with the likes of us, suggested Jeren.
Samwell Tarly sat hunched over a table in a niche carved into the stone of the wall . The glow came from the lamp hung over his head . He looked up at the sound of Jon ' s steps.
I would so, Grenn insisted . I ' d see them a long way off.
The ranger gave his horse into the care of one of his men and followed . You are Jon Snow . You have your father ' s look.
Jon had joined the wildlings at Qhorin Halfhand ' s command . Ride with them, eat with them, fight with them, the ranger had told him, the night before he died . And watch . But all his watching had learned him little . The Halfhand had suspected that the wildlings had gone up into the bleak and barren Frostfangs in search of some weapon, some power, some fell sorcery with which to break the Wall . . . but if they had found any such, no one was boasting of it openly, or showing it to Jon . Nor had Mance Rayder confided any of his plans or strategies . Since that first night, he had hardly seen the man save at a distance.
He took off his wet cloak, but it was too cold and damp here to strip down any further . Ghost stretched out beside him and licked his glove before curling up to sleep . Jon was grateful for his warmth . He wondered if the fire was still burning outside, or if it had gone out by now . If the Wall should ever fall, all the fires will go out . The moon shone through the curtain of falling water to lay a shimmering pale stripe across the sand, but after a time that too faded and went dark.
Whitetree, the village was named on Sam ' s old maps . Jon did not think it much of a village . Four tumbledown one-room houses of unmortared stone surrounded an empty sheepfold and a well . The houses were roofed with sod, the windows shuttered with ragged pieces of hide . And above them loomed the pale limbs and dark red leaves of a monstrous great weirwood.
That ' s not for me to say, my lord.
Jon faced him . [BOS] If you ' ve had the Horn of Joramun all along, why haven ' t you used it? Why bother building turtles and sending Thenns to kill us in our beds? If this horn is all the songs say, why not just sound it and be done? [EOS] 
Very well . Jon, see to my horse, and tell Ser Jaremy to put the dead men in a storeroom until the maester is ready for them . Mormont strode away grumbling.
Then why did you command it of me?
Truly, the gods had heard Jon ' s prayer that night; the fire had caught in the dead man ' s clothing and consumed him as if his flesh were candle wax and his bones old dry wood . Jon had only to close his eyes to see the thing staggering across the solar, crashing against the furniture and flailing at the flames . It was the face that haunted him most; surrounded by a nimbus of fire, hair blazing like straw, the dead flesh melting away and sloughing off its skull to reveal the gleam of bone beneath.
Jon was not entirely innocent of the history of the realm; his own maester had seen to that . That was the year of the Great Council, he said . The lords passed over Prince Aerion ' s infant son and Prince Daeron ' s daughter and gave the crown to Aegon.
His fingers were growing stiff and his thumb was bleeding, but still Jon notched and drew and loosed . A gout of flame caught his eye, and he turned to see the door of the common hall afire . It was only a few moments before the whole great timbered hall was burning . Three-Finger Hobb and his Mole ' s Town helpers were safe atop the Wall, he knew, but it felt like a punch in the belly all the same . JON, Deaf Dick yelled in his thick voice, the armory . They were on the roof, he saw . One had a torch . Dick hopped up on the crenel for a better shot, jerked his crossbow to his shoulder, and sent a quarrel thrumming toward the torch man . He missed.
Then you saw us all . Prince Joffrey and Prince Tommen, Princess Myrcella, my brothers Robb and Bran and Rickon, my sisters Arya and Sansa . You saw them walk the center aisle with every eye upon them and take their seats at the table just below the dais where the king and queen were seated.
He did not understand . What do you mean?
His uncle was sharp-featured and gaunt as a mountain crag, but there was always a hint of laughter in his blue-grey eyes . He dressed in black, as befitted a man of the Night ' s Watch . Tonight it was rich black velvet, with high leather boots and a wide belt with a silver buckle . A heavy silver chain was looped round his neck . Benjen watched Ghost with amusement as he ate his onion . A very quiet wolf, he observed.
Jon rose at dawn the next day to watch his uncle leave . One of his rangers, a big ugly man, sang a bawdy song as he saddled his garron, his breath steaming in the cold morning air . Ben Stark smiled at that, but he had no smile for his nephew . [BOS] How often must I tell you no, Jon? We ' ll speak when I return . [EOS] 
Maester Aemon gave Jon ' s crude bandage a sniff when Clydas cut it away . We?
Arrows for my brothers, Jon thought . Arrows for my father ' s folk, for the people of Winterfell and Deepwood Motte and the Last Hearth . Arrows for the north.
And suddenly Jon was back in the Lord Commander ' s Tower again . A severed hand was climbing his calf and when he pried it off with the point of his longsword, it lay writhing, fingers opening and closing . The dead man rose to his feet, blue eyes shining in that gashed and swollen face . Ropes of torn flesh hung from the great wound in his belly, yet there was no blood.
Jon said at once . [BOS] No, That couldn ' t be . My father would never betray the king! [EOS] 
My sword is pledged to the Night ' s Watch, Your Grace, Jon Snow answered carefully.
The day promised to be damp and cold, and damper and colder by the Wall, beneath those tons of ice . The closer they got, the more the Thenns held back . They have never seen the Wall before, not even the Magnar, Jon realized . It frightens them . In the Seven Kingdoms it was said that the Wall marked the end of the world . That is true for them as well . It was all in where you stood.
Jon went back inside to where the others waited . [BOS] We need to repair the outer gate as best we can and then block up this section of the tunnel . Rubble, chunks of ice, anything . All the way to the second gate, if we can . Ser Wynton will need to take command, he ' s the last knight left, but he needs to move now, the giants will be back before we know it . We have to tell him— [EOS] 
To go, he said at once.
Up they went, and up, and up, black shadows creeping across the moonlit wall of rock . Anyone down on the floor of the pass could have seen them easily, but the mountain hid them from the view of the wildlings by their fire . They were close now, though . Jon could sense it . Even so, he did not think of the foes who were waiting for him, all unknowing, but of his brother at Winterfell . Bran used to love to climb . I wish I had a tenth part of his courage.
Mammoths centered the wildling line, he saw, a hundred or more with giants on their backs clutching mauls and huge stone axes . More giants loped beside them, pushing along a tree trunk on great wooden wheels, its end sharpened to a point . A ram, he thought bleakly . If the gate still stood below, a few kisses from that thing would soon turn it into splinters . On either side of the giants came a wave of horsemen in boiled leather harness with fire-hardened lances, a mass of running archers, hundreds of foot with spears, slings, clubs, and leathern shields . The bone chariots from the Frozen Shore clattered forward on the flanks, bouncing over rocks and roots behind teams of huge white dogs . The fury of the wild, Jon thought as he listened to the skirl of skins, to the dogs barking and baying, the mammoths trumpeting, the free folk whistling and screaming, the giants roaring in the Old Tongue . Their drums echoed off the ice like rolling thunder.
His friends rallied to him . We asked the septon to light a candle for your father, Matthar told him . It ' s a lie, we all know it ' s a lie, even Grenn knows it ' s a lie, Pyp chimed in . Grenn nodded, and Sam clasped Jon ' s hand, You ' re my brother now, so he ' s my father too, the fat boy said . If you want to go out to the weirwoods and pray to the old gods, I ' ll go with you.
You said the words, Pyp reminded him . Now my watch begins, you said it . It shall not end until my death.
The tall man gestured, and two of the others pulled Jon from the bed . With the lantern leading the way they marched him from his cell and up a half turn of stair, to the Old Bear ' s solar . He saw Maester Aemon standing by the fire, his hands folded around the head of a blackthorn cane . Septon Cellador was half drunk as usual, and Ser Wynton Stout was asleep in a window seat . The other brothers were strangers to him . All but one.
With Mance Rayder ' s head, aye . Grenn was trying to sound cheerful, Jon could tell . Sam the Slayer!
The sound of voices echoing off the vaulted ceiling brought him back to Castle Black . I don ' t know, a man was saying, in a voice thick with doubts . Maybe if I knew the man better . . . Lord Stannis didn ' t have much good to say of him, I ' ll tell you that.
The black brother made a disgusted noise and opened the door to admit him . Wait in the library . There ' s wood . Start a fire . I won ' t have the maester catching a chill on account of you.
Stannis gave a curt nod . Your father was a man of honor . He was no friend to me, but I saw his worth . Your brother was a rebel and a traitor who meant to steal half my kingdom, but no man can question his courage . What of you?
I ' ll do whatever you ask . The words came hard, but Jon said them.
Arya ' s eyes went wide . Dark eyes, like his . A sword, she said in a small, hushed breath.
And so they were, he thought to himself after Sam had taken his leave . Robb and Bran and Rickon were his father ' s sons, and he loved them still, yet Jon knew that he had never truly been one of them . Catelyn Stark had seen to that . The grey walls of Winterfell might still haunt his dreams, but Castle Black was his life now, and his brothers were Sam and Grenn and Halder and Pyp and the other cast-outs who wore the black of the Night ' s Watch.
A wolf dream, the Halfhand said . Craster told the Lord Commander that the wildlings were gathering at the source of the Milkwater . That may be why you dreamed it . Or it may be that you saw what waits for us, a few hours farther on . Tell me.
The girl laughed scornfully . For one o ' us . D ' ya think you ' re the first crow ever flew down off the Wall? In your hearts you all want to fly free.
Jon admitted stiffly . [BOS] Lord Eddard Stark is my father, [EOS] 
Benjen Stark stood up . More ' s the pity . He put a hand on Jon ' s shoulder . Come back to me after you ' ve fathered a few bastards of your own, and we ' ll see how you feel.
You have learned the words of the vow . Think carefully before you say them, for once you have taken the black, there is no turning back . The penalty for desertion is death . The Old Bear paused for a moment before he said, Are there any among you who wish to leave our company? If so, go now, and no one shall think the less of you.
Yet even so, Jon Snow was not sorry he had come . There were wonders here as well . He had seen sunlight flashing on icy thin waterfalls as they plunged over the lips of sheer stone cliffs, and a mountain meadow full of autumn wildflowers, blue coldsnaps and bright scarlet frostfires and stands of piper ' s grass in russet and gold . He had peered down ravines so deep and black they seemed certain to end in some hell, and he had ridden his garron over a wind-eaten bridge of natural stone with nothing but sky to either side . Eagles nested in the heights and came down to hunt the valleys, circling effortlessly on great blue-grey wings that seemed almost part of the sky . Once he had watched a shadowcat stalk a ram, flowing down the mountainside like liquid smoke until it was ready to pounce.
Dead, the raven said . Dead . Dead.
Winterfell, he said, by way of Castle Black.
Suddenly he realized that the table had fallen silent, and they were all looking at him . He felt the tears begin to well behind his eyes . He pushed himself to his feet.
I never did, but see you don ' t go spreading that about . Tormund Giantsbane has a better ring to it than Tormund Giantsbabe, and that ' s the honest truth o ' it.
Wed? Tormund laughed . Who spoke of wedding? In the south, must a man wed every girl he beds?
We should . Her breasts bounced as she stood on one leg to pull one boot, then hopped onto her other foot to attend to the other . Her nipples were wide pink circles . You as well, Ygritte said as she yanked down her sheepskin breeches . If you want to look you have to show . You know nothing, Jon Snow.
If winter had come and gone more quickly and spring had followed in its turn, I might have been chosen to hold one of these towers in my father ' s name . Lord Eddard was dead, however, his brother Benjen lost; the shield they dreamt together would never be forged . Jon said . [BOS] This land belongs to the Watch, [EOS] 
I don ' t know what your skull is stuffed with . My lord.
Jon was lost . [BOS] My lord? [EOS] 
Ygritte trotted beside Jon as he slowed his garron to a walk . She claimed to be three years older than him, though she stood half a foot shorter; however old she might be, the girl was a tough little thing . Stonesnake had called her a spearwife when they ' d captured her in the Skirling Pass . She wasn ' t wed and her weapon of choice was a short curved bow of horn and weirwood, but spearwife fit her all the same . She reminded him a little of his sister Arya, though Arya was younger and probably skinnier . It was hard to tell how plump or thin Ygritte might be, with all the furs and skins she wore.
Septon Cellador cleared his throat . Lord Slynt, he said, this boy refused to swear his vows properly in the sept, but went beyond the Wall to say his words before a heart tree . His father ' s gods, he said, but they are wildling gods as well.
He found Quort dead, and Stone Thumbs dying . He found some dead and dying Thenns he had never truly known . He found Big Boil, weak from all the blood he ' d lost but still alive.
Ser Jaremy stood . The Wildlings have axes too.
The other wight, the one-handed thing that had once been a ranger named Jafer Flowers, had also been destroyed, cut near to pieces by a dozen swords … but not before it had slain Ser Jaremy Rykker and four other men . Ser Jaremy had finished the job of hacking its head off, yet had died all the same when the headless corpse pulled his own dagger from its sheath and buried it in his bowels . Strength and courage did not avail much against foemen who would not fall because they were already dead; even arms and armor offered small protection.
What gods? Jon was remembering that they ' d seen no boys in Craster ' s Keep, nor men either, save Craster himself.
The last night fell black and moonless, but for once the sky was clear . I am going up the hill to look for Ghost, he told the Thenns at the cave mouth, and they grunted and let him pass.
Maester Aemon was not long in coming . He moved slowly, one spotted hand on Clydas ' s arm as he shuffled forward with small careful steps . Around his thin neck his chain hung heavy, gold and silver links glinting amongst iron, lead, tin, and other base metals . Jon Snow, he said, you must tell me all you ' ve seen and done when you are stronger . Donal, put a kettle of wine on the fire, and my irons as well . I will want them red-hot . Clydas, I shall need that good sharp knife of yours . The maester was more than a hundred years old; shrunken, frail, hairless, and quite blind . But if his milky eyes saw nothing, his wits were still as sharp as they had ever been.
Half the wildling host had lived all their lives without so much as a glimpse of the Wall, Jon judged, and most of those spoke no word of the Common Tongue . It did not matter . Mance Rayder spoke the Old Tongue, even sang in it, fingering his lute and filling the night with strange wild music.
That morning he called it first . I ' m Lord of Winterfell! he cried, as he had a hundred times before . Only this time, this time, Robb had answered, You can ' t be Lord of Winterfell, you ' re bastard-born . My lady mother says you can ' t ever be the Lord of Winterfell.
Ser Alliser Thorne shattered the silence . The turncloak graces us with his presence at last.
Jon, Lord Mormont commanded, ride back along the column and spread the word . And remind the officers that I want no trouble about Craster ' s wives . The men are to mind their hands and speak to these women as little as need be.
Why do you hesitate? Styr said . Kill him, and be done.
Jon could taste the mockery there, but there was no denying the truth . The Watch had built nineteen great strongholds along the Wall, but only three were still occupied: Eastwatch on its grey windswept shore, the Shadow Tower hard by the mountains where the Wall ended, and Castle Black between them, at the end of the kingsroad . The other keeps, long deserted, were lonely, haunted places, where cold winds whistled through black windows and the spirits of the dead manned the parapets.
Winter is coming . The Stark words had never sounded so grim or ominous to Jon as they did now . My lord, he asked hesitantly, it ' s said there was a bird last night …
They ' ve sent me to treat with the King-beyond-the-Wall.
I know, said Sam guiltily, but she was afraid . I know what it is to be afraid . I told her . . . He swallowed.
It must have been warmer where you come from.
We can ' t be certain.
and her kisses were warmer than spring.
They ' re down there and we ' re up here, Jon said, and so long as we hold the gate they cannot pass . They cannot pass! They were all shouting then, roaring his own words back at him, waving swords and longbows in the air as their cheeks flushed red . Jon saw Kegs standing there with a warhorn slung beneath his arm . Brother, he told him, sound for battle.
How else? Sorcery . Qhorin bit the egg in half . Why else would Mance choose to gather his strength in the Frostfangs? Bleak and hard they are, and a long weary march from the Wall.
Or they will find us, thought Jon.
There ' s nothing here.
The Old Bear was accustomed to rise at first light, so Jon had until dawn to put as many leagues as he could between him and the Wall … if Sam Tarly did not betray him . The fat boy was dutiful and easily frightened, but he loved Jon like a brother . If questioned, Sam would doubtless tell them the truth, but Jon could not imagine him braving the guards in front of the King ' s Tower to wake Mormont from sleep.
You did not, Grenn said, scowling . I would have seen.
We should have built hoardings . Jon thought he could hear the crash of axes on wood, but that was probably just fear ringing in his ears . He looked to Grenn . Do it.
Maybe they should . Have you ever seen the septa ' s legs?
Why don ' t you, then? Jon could have drawn Longclaw then, but he wanted to hear what the wildling had to say.
Will he now? The smith eyed him frankly . I hope that ' s so, boy, but once I might have said the same of Robert.
A breach.
By then the east stables were afire too, black smoke and wisps of burning hay pouring from the stalls . When the roof collapsed, flames rose up roaring, so loud they almost drowned out the warhorns of the Thenns . Fifty of them were pounding up the kingsroad in tight column, their shields held up above their heads . Others were swarming through the vegetable garden, across the flagstone yard, around the old dry well . Three had hacked their way through the doors of Maester Aemon ' s apartments in the timber keep below the rookery, and a desperate fight was going on atop the Silent Tower, longswords against bronze axes . None of that mattered . The dance has moved on, he thought.
One of the mammoths was running berserk, smashing wildlings with his trunk and crushing archers underfoot . Jon pulled back his bow once more, and launched another arrow at the beast ' s shaggy back to urge him on . To east and west, the flanks of the wildling host had reached the Wall unopposed . The chariots drew in or turned while the horsemen milled aimlessly beneath the looming cliff of ice . At the gate! a shout came . Spare Boot, maybe . Mammoth at the gate!
Ser, snapped the jowly man . You will address Ser Alliser as ser, and myself as m ' lord . I am Janos Slynt, Lord of Harrenhal, and commander here at Castle Black until such time as Bowen Marsh returns with his garrison . You will grant us our courtesies, yes . I will not suffer to hear an anointed knight like the good Ser Alliser mocked by a traitor ' s bastard . He raised a hand and pointed a meaty finger at Jon ' s face . Do you deny that you took a wildling woman into your bed?
Othell Yarwyck stood up slowly, frowning . The big builder rubbed his long lantern jaw and said, Well, I ' m pulling my name out . If you wanted me, you had ten chances to choose me, and you didn ' t . Not enough of you, anyway . I was going to say that those who were casting a token for me ought to choose Lord Janos . . .
And did for Orell too, said Rattleshirt.
Lady Stark looked over . For a moment she did not seem to recognize him . Finally she blinked . What are you doing here? she asked in a voice strangely flat and emotionless.
Mormont ' s head came up sharply . What?
Across the yard, one of the bowmen on the roof of the old Flint Barracks had unlaced his breeches and was pissing through a crenel . Mully, he knew from the man ' s greasy orange hair . Men in black cloaks were visible on other roofs and tower tops as well, though nine of every ten happened to be made of straw . The scarecrow sentinels, Donal Noye called them . Only we ' re the crows, Jon mused, and most of us were scared enough.
I ' ve got your similar aroma right here . Hake patted his dirk . Grumbling, he filled Jon ' s bowl from the kettle.
If Marsh is gone, who did he name as castellan?
Jon Snow ' s garron whickered softly, but a touch and a soft word soon quieted the animal . Would that his own fears could be calmed so easily . He was all in black, the black of the Night ' s Watch, but the enemy rode before and behind . Wildlings, and I am with them . Ygritte wore the cloak of Qhorin Halfhand . Lenyl had his hauberk, the big spearwife Ragwyle his gloves, one of the bowmen his boots . Qhorin ' s helm had been won by the short homely man called Longspear Ryk, but it fit poorly on his narrow head, so he ' d given that to Ygritte as well . And Rattleshirt had Qhorin ' s bones in his bag, along with the bloody head of Ebben, who set out with Jon to scout the Skirling Pass . Dead, all dead but me, and I am dead to the world.
Bastard children were born from lust and lies, men said; their nature was wanton and treacherous . Once Jon had meant to prove them wrong, to show his lord father that he could be as good and true a son as Robb . I made a botch of that . Robb had become a hero king; if Jon was remembered at all, it would be as a turncloak, an oathbreaker, and a murderer . He was glad that Lord Eddard was not alive to see his shame.
I am loath to risk more men.
We shall await you atop the Wall, said Melisandre . We, Jon heard, not he . It ' s as they say . This is his true queen, not the one he left at Eastwatch.
Let me give you some counsel, bastard, Lannister said . Never forget what you are, for surely the world will not . Make it your strength . Then it can never be your weakness . Armor yourself in it, and it will never be used to hurt you.
The real battle was on the steps . Noye had put spearmen on the two lowest landings, but the headlong flight of the villagers had panicked them and they had joined the flight, racing up toward the third landing with the Thenns killing anyone who fell behind . The archers and crossbowmen on the higher landings were trying to drop shafts over their heads . Jon nocked an arrow, drew, and loosed, and was pleased when one of the wildlings went rolling down the steps . The heat of the fires was making the Wall weep, and the flames danced and shimmered against the ice . The steps shook to the footsteps of men running for their lives.
And now they come, said Qhorin.
Lord Janos Slynt sat down so heavily he made a thump, but Ser Alliser filled the vault with mocking laughter . Ser Piggy thinks we ' re all fools, brothers, he said . He ' s taught the bird this little trick . They all say snow, go up to the rookery and hear for yourselves . Mormont ' s bird had more words than that.
But when they reached the ringfort, Ghost balked again . He padded forward warily to sniff at the gap in the stones, and then retreated, as if he did not like what he ' d smelled . Jon tried to grab him by the scruff of his neck and haul him bodily inside the ring, no easy task; the wolf weighed as much as he did, and was stronger by far . Ghost, what ' s wrong with you? It was not like him to be so unsettled . In the end Jon had to give it up . As you will, he told the wolf . Go, hunt . The red eyes watched him as he made his way back through the mossy stones.
Jon told the direwolf as he swung up into the saddle . He turned the mare ' s head to slide off through the trees, but they were on him before he had gone ten feet . [BOS] Traitor, [EOS] 
Jon climbed the steps slowly, trying not to think that this might be the last time ever . Ghost padded silently beside him . Outside, snow swirled through the castle gates, and the yard was all noise and chaos, but inside the thick stone walls it was still warm and quiet . Too quiet for Jon ' s liking.
Jon asked Satin to help him down to the yard . His wounded leg hurt so badly that he could hardly walk, even with the crutch . Bring the torch, he told the boy from Oldtown . I need to look for someone . It had been mostly Thenns on the steps . Surely some of the free folk had escaped . Mance ' s people, not the Magnar ' s . She might have been one . So they climbed down past the bodies of the men who ' d tried the trapdoor, and Jon wandered through the dark with his crutch under one arm, and the other around the shoulders of a boy who ' d been a whore in Oldtown.
Yet still the drums beat on, the trebuchets shuddered and thumped, and the sound of skinpipes came wafting through the night like the songs of strange fierce birds . Septon Cellador began to sing as well, his voice tremulous and thick with wine.
Jon Snow, you know nothing . You don ' t go in with clothes.
For myself, my lord?
The Halfhand helped himself to an egg and cracked it on the edge of the bowl . These kings will do what they will, he said, peeling away the shell . Likely it will be little enough . The best hope is Winterfell . The Starks must rally the north.
Sam stared at the last of his pork pie and gave a feeble shake of his head, too scared even to talk . A burst of laughter filled the hall . Jon heard Pyp squeaking in a high voice . He stood . Let ' s go outside.
Jon thrust the practice sword into the earth . [BOS] Might I be allowed to change? I am in no fit state to stand before a king . [EOS] 
Qhorin Halfhand gazed at him across the fire, his eyes lost in pools of shadow . When I see him next . I swear it . He gestured at the fire . More wood . I want it bright and hot.
He had never thought to find a stone castle on the far side of the Wall, but he had pictured some sort of motte-and-bailey with a wooden palisade and a timber tower keep . What they found instead was a midden heap, a pigsty, an empty sheepfold, and a windowless daub-and-wattle hall scarce worthy of the name . It was long and low, chinked together from logs and roofed with sod . The compound stood atop a rise too modest to name a hill, surrounded by an earthen dike . Brown rivulets flowed down the slope where the rain had eaten gaping holes in the defenses, to join a rushing brook that curved around to the north, its thick waters turned into a murky torrent by the rains.
Across the field one column had washed over Harma Dogshead . Another smashed into the flank of Tormund ' s spearmen as he and his sons desperately tried to turn them . The giants were climbing onto their mammoths, though, and the knights on their barded horses did not like that at all; he could see how the coursers and destriers screamed and scattered at the sight of those lumbering mountains . But there was fear on the wildling side as well, hundreds of women and children rushing away from the battle, some of them blundering right under the hooves of garrons . He saw an old woman ' s dog cart veer into the path of three chariots, to send them crashing into each other.
Jon swallowed his anger . [BOS] I abandoned no one . I left the Fist with Qhorin Halfhand to scout the Skirling Pass . I joined the wildlings under orders . The Halfhand feared that Mance might have found the Horn of Winter . . . [EOS] 
If you like . Their voices blended as one beneath the rising moon, while Ghost listened and the mountains themselves bore witness . Night gathers, and now my watch begins . It shall not end until my death . I shall take no wife, hold no lands, father no children . I shall wear no crowns and win no glory . I shall live and die at my post . I am the sword in the darkness . I am the watcher on the walls . I am the fire that burns against the cold, the light that brings the dawn, the horn that wakes the sleepers, the shield that guards the realms of men . I pledge my life and honor to the Night ' s Watch, for this night and all the nights to come.
There ' s giants in the Frostfangs, and wargs, and worse things, said Lark the Sisterman.
Jon nodded, reluctantly.
Does that mean …?
The raven flapped big black wings . Me, me, me.
At the ringwall, he found the guards sliding spikes from the half-frozen earth to make an opening . It was not long until the first of the brothers from the Shadow Tower began wending their way up the slope . All in leather and fur they were, with here and there a bit of steel or bronze; heavy beards covered hard lean faces, and made them look as shaggy as their garrons . Jon was surprised to see some of them were riding two to a horse . When he looked more closely, it was plain that many of them were wounded . There has been trouble on the way.
The Magnar of Thenn studied Jon with his chilly grey eyes . We shall learn their numbers soon enough, he said after a moment . Go . I will send for you if I have further questions.
But he had not left the Wall for that; he had left because he was after all his father ' s son, and Robb ' s brother . The gift of a sword, even a sword as fine as Longclaw, did not make him a Mormont . Nor was he Aemon Targaryen . Three times the old man had chosen, and three times he had chosen honor, but that was him . Even now, Jon could not decide whether the maester had stayed because he was weak and craven, or because he was strong and true . Yet he understood what the old man had meant, about the pain of choosing; he understood that all too well.
If you are ever Lord Commander, you may do as you please, Mormont told the ranger, but it seems to me that I have not died yet, nor have the brothers put you in my place.
The king laughed . Your Mance! Why not? I promised you a tale before, of how I knew you . Have you puzzled it out yet?
He remembered Robb as he had last seen him, standing in the yard with snow melting in his auburn hair . Jon would have to come to him in secret, disguised . He tried to imagine the look on Robb ' s face when he revealed himself . His brother would shake his head and smile, and he ' d say … he ' d say …
Qhorin ' s shrewd grey eyes seemed to see right through him . So you let her go? He did not sound the least surprised.
You heard me . I mean to find Ben Stark, alive or dead . He chewed and swallowed . I will not sit here meekly and wait for the snows and the ice winds . We must know what is happening . This time the Night ' s Watch will ride in force, against the King-beyond-the-Wall, the Others, and anything else that may be out there . I mean to command them myself . He pointed his dagger at Jon ' s chest . By custom, the Lord Commander ' s steward is his squire as well … but I do not care to wake every dawn wondering if you ' ve run off again . So I will have an answer from you, Lord Snow, and I will have it now . Are you a brother of the Night ' s Watch … or only a bastard boy who wants to play at war?
Jon told him . [BOS] I would sooner not hurt you, Move aside, Sam, or I ' ll ride you down . [EOS] 
Thunder rumbled softly in the distance, but above him the clouds were breaking up . Jon searched the sky until he found the Ice Dragon, then turned the mare north for the Wall and Castle Black . The throb of pain in his thigh muscle made him wince as he put his heels into the old man ' s horse . I am going home, he told himself . But if that was true, why did he feel so hollow?
Jon said, too late . She bolted, ran . [BOS] Wait, [EOS] 
The wildling leader fixed him with an unfriendly stare . Might be you fooled these others, crow, but don ' t think you ' ll be fooling Mance . He ' ll take one look a ' you and know you ' re false . And when he does, I ' ll make a cloak o ' your wolf there, and open your soft boy ' s belly and sew a weasel up inside.
Jon breathed, scrambling to his feet . [BOS] Bran, Something ' s happened to Bran . [EOS] 
I ' ve never had a crown on my head or sat my arse on a bloody throne, if that ' s what you ' re asking, Mance replied . My birth is as low as a man ' s can get, no septon ' s ever smeared my head with oils, I don ' t own any castles, and my queen wears furs and amber, not silk and sapphires . I am my own champion, my own fool, and my own harpist . You don ' t become King-beyond-the-Wall because your father was . The free folk won ' t follow a name, and they don ' t care which brother was born first . They follow fighters . When I left the Shadow Tower there were five men making noises about how they might be the stuff of kings . Tormund was one, the Magnar another . The other three I slew, when they made it plain they ' d sooner fight than follow.
Dick Follard was deaf as a stone, but his nose worked well enough . The buns were still warm from the oven when he went digging in the basket and plucked one out . He found a crock of butter as well, and spread some with his dagger . Raisins, he announced happily . Nuts, too . His speech was thick, but easy enough to understand once you got used to it.
Jon said softly . [BOS] Untouched, And Ghost is different . The dogs and the horses won ' t go near them . [EOS] 
Had he lost him? Dywen chuckled . See that you young bucks don ' t go nosing about Craster ' s wives, you hear?
Jafer ' s right wrist ended in the ruin of torn flesh and splintered bone left by Ghost ' s jaws . His right hand was floating in a jar of vinegar back in Maester Aemon ' s tower . His left hand, still at the end of his arm, was as black as his cloak.
One of the guards overheard Clydas reading the letter to Maester Aemon . Pyp leaned close . Jon, I ' m sorry . He was your father ' s friend, wasn ' t he?
Doves and pigeons can also be trained to carry messages, the maester went on, though the raven is a stronger flyer, larger, bolder, far more clever, better able to defend itself against hawks … yet ravens are black, and they eat the dead, so some godly men abhor them . Baelor the Blessed tried to replace all the ravens with doves, did you know? The maester turned his white eyes on Jon, smiling . The Night ' s Watch prefers ravens.
Jon said when the horns had died away, [BOS] Archers, you ' ll aim for the giants with that ram, every bloody one of you . Loose at my command, not before . THE GIANTS AND THE RAM . I want arrows raining on them with every step, but we ' ll wait till they ' re in range . Any man who wastes an arrow will need to climb down and fetch it back, do you hear me? [EOS] 
Frowning, Jon continued on his way . He led the mare for half an hour, until she was dry . Ghost did not appear . Jon wanted to mount up and ride again, but he was concerned about his missing wolf . Ghost, he called again . Where are you? To me! Ghost! Nothing in these woods could trouble a direwolf, even a half-grown direwolf, unless … no, Ghost was too smart to attack a bear, and if there was a wolf pack anywhere close Jon would have surely heard them howling.
Jon had hoped that the arrival of men from the Shadow Tower would lift the spirits in the camp . Only last night, he was coming back through the dark from a piss when he heard five or six men talking in low voices around the embers of a fire . When he heard Chett muttering that it was past time they turned back, Jon stopped to listen . It ' s an old man ' s folly, this ranging, he heard . We ' ll find nothing but our graves in them mountains.
in a voice that was sweet as a peach,
The direwolf trotted to him . Jon heard Samwell Tarly ' s sharp intake of breath.
Take me for what?
Robb was in the middle of it, shouting commands with the best of them . He seemed to have grown of late, as if Bran ' s fall and his mother ' s collapse had somehow made him stronger . Grey Wind was at his side.
Jon looked around him in sick disbelief . Maester Aemon ' s blind eyes were raised toward the light he could not see . The septon was arranging crystals on the altar . Only Sam and Dareon remained on the benches; a fat boy, a singer … and him.
Life at Castle Black followed certain patterns; the mornings were for swordplay, the afternoons for work . The black brothers set new recruits to many different tasks, to learn where their skills lay . Jon cherished the rare afternoons when he was sent out with Ghost ranging at his side to bring back game for the Lord Commander ' s table, but for every day spent hunting, he gave a dozen to Donal Noye in the armory, spinning the whetstone while the one-armed smith sharpened axes grown dull from use, or pumping the bellows as Noye hammered out a new sword . Other times he ran messages, stood at guard, mucked out stables, fletched arrows, assisted Maester Aemon with his birds or Bowen Marsh with his counts and inventories.
Something worse than we can imagine, suggested Dolorous Edd . Well, I might be able to imagine it, but I ' d sooner not . Bad enough to know you ' re going to come to some awful end without thinking about it aforetime.
Some power . What it is, our captive could not say . He was questioned perhaps too sharply, and died with much unsaid . I doubt he knew in any case.
Well, they ' re going to get all messed up anyway, she said . Who cares how they ' re folded?
Soon, Jon thought as they climbed . He ' d seen the harbinger that had come to Maester Aemon with word of summer ' s end, the great raven of the Citadel, white and silent as Ghost . He had seen a winter once, when he was very young, but everyone agreed that it had been a short one, and mild . This one would be different . He could feel it in his bones.
Suddenly she looked like she was going to cry . I wish you were coming with us.
The crow is the raven ' s poor cousin . They are both beggars in black, hated and misunderstood.
Jon shook his head . No one . The castle is always empty . He had never told anyone of the dream, and he did not understand why he was telling Sam now, yet somehow it felt good to talk of it . Even the ravens are gone from the rookery, and the stables are full of bones . That always scares me . I start to run then, throwing open doors, climbing the tower three steps at a time, screaming for someone, for anyone . And then I find myself in front of the door to the crypts . It ' s black inside, and I can see the steps spiraling down . Somehow I know I have to go down there, but I don ' t want to . I ' m afraid of what might be waiting for me . The old Kings of Winter are down there, sitting on their thrones with stone wolves at their feet and iron swords across their laps, but it ' s not them I ' m afraid of . I scream that I ' m not a Stark, that this isn ' t my place, but it ' s no good, I have to go anyway, so I start down, feeling the walls as I descend, with no torch to light the way . It gets darker and darker, until I want to scream . He stopped, frowning, embarrassed . That ' s when I always wake . His skin cold and clammy, shivering in the darkness of his cell . Ghost would leap up beside him, his warmth as comforting as daybreak . He would go back to sleep with his face pressed into the direwolf ' s shaggy white fur . Do you dream of Horn Hill? Jon asked.
The raven seemed to like the notion . Wall, it screamed, spreading black wings like a high collar behind Mormont ' s head.
Ten yards below the cave mouth the hunters halted . Their leader came on alone, riding a beast that seemed more goat than horse, from the surefooted way it climbed the uneven slope . As man and mount grew nearer Jon could hear them clattering; both were armored in bones . Cow bones, sheep bones, the bones of goats and aurochs and elk, the great bones of the hairy mammoths . . . and human bones as well.
You drank the wine?
The rain might have stopped, but the compound was still a morass of shallow lakes and slippery mud . Black brothers were folding their tents, feeding their horses, and chewing on strips of salt beef . Jarman Buckwell ' s scouts were tightening the girths on their saddles before setting out . Jon, Buckwell greeted him from horseback . Keep a good edge on that bastard sword of yours . We ' ll be needing it soon enough.
Longspear, watch the beast . Rattleshirt yanked open the tent and gestured Jon and Ygritte inside.
How long ago was this?
That is a longsword, not an old man ' s cane, Ser Alliser said sharply . Are your legs hurting, Lord Snow?
I . . . I know that . What could he say?
When he caught his first glimpse of the Wall looming above the tops of an ancient gnarled oak, Jon was vastly relieved . Mormont reined up suddenly and turned in his saddle . Tarly, he barked, come here.
You rode with these wildlings, said Thorne . Mance Rayder knows you . He will be more inclined to trust you.
Jon asked . [BOS] So how did you come by your other names? Mance called you the Horn-Blower, didn ' t he? Mead-king of Ruddy Hall, Husband to Bears, Father to Hosts? [EOS] It was the horn blowing he particularly wanted to hear about, but he dared not ask too plainly . And Joramun blew the Horn of Winter, and woke giants from the earth . Is that where they had come from, them and their mammoths? Had Mance Rayder found the Horn of Joramun, and given it to Tormund Thunderfist to blow?
Words . Words are wind . Why do you think I abandoned Dragonstone and sailed to the Wall, Lord Snow?
Jon Snow sat up suddenly, and the three men froze at the sound of the slosh . [BOS] My lords, [EOS] he said with cold courtesy.
Drink this . Grenn held a cup to his lips . Jon drank . His head was full of wolves and eagles, the sound of his brothers ' laughter . The faces above him began to blur and fade . They can ' t be dead . Theon would never do that . And Winterfell . . . grey granite, oak and iron, crows wheeling around the towers, steam rising off the hot pools in the godswood, the stone kings sitting on their thrones . . . how could Winterfell be gone?
In that case, you had best stay close, the dwarf said . He cocked his oversized head to one side and looked Jon over with his mismatched eyes . I am Tyrion Lannister.
Jon said, pointing . [BOS] There ' s a winch, They can draw you up in a cage . [EOS] 
We ' re not sending you to talk with Mance Rayder, Ser Alliser said . We ' re sending you to kill him.
The Weeper ' s red rheumy eyes gave Jon another look . Aye? Well, he has a wolfish cast to him, now as I look close . Bring him to Mance, might be he ' ll keep him . He wheeled his horse around and galloped off, his riders hard behind him.
There are older men, Jon wanted to say, better men . I am still as green as summer grass . I ' m wounded, and I stand accused of desertion . His mouth had gone bone dry . Aye, he managed.
Mance Rayder looked at Jon ' s face for a long moment . I think we had best find you a new cloak, the king said, holding out his hand.
Benjen gave Jon a careful, measuring look . You don ' t miss much, do you, Jon? We could use a man like you on the Wall.
Water ran off the brim of Sam ' s hat as he lifted his head . Oh, hullo, Jon . No, they just hate the rain, the same as us.
Lord Slynt ' s small eyes studied him . Ser Glendon, he commanded, bring in the other prisoner.
The Wall defends itself, Jon thought as he pulled Ygritte back to her feet.
Boy, a voice called out to him . Jon turned.
As you wish, Bowen Marsh responded.
The free folk.
Har . Tormund spat . Well, I stepped in that! He grinned at Jon . See, lad, that ' s why he ' s king and I ' m not . I can outdrink, outfight, and outsing him, and my member ' s thrice the size o ' his, but Mance has cunning . He was raised a crow, you know, and the crow ' s a tricksy bird.
He ' s frightened . We ' re leaving him . He remembered the day he had left Winterfell, all the bittersweet farewells; Bran lying broken, Robb with snow in his hair, Arya raining kisses on him after he ' d given her Needle . Once we say our words, we ' ll all have duties to attend to . Some of us may be sent away, to Eastwatch or the Shadow Tower . Sam will remain in training, with the likes of Rast and Cuger and these new boys who are coming up the kingsroad . Gods only know what they ' ll be like, but you can bet Ser Alliser will send them against him, first chance he gets.
He reached the landing and stood for a long moment, afraid . Ghost nuzzled at his hand . He took courage from that . He straightened, and entered the room.
Lannister studied his face . Yes, he said . I can see it . You have more of the north in you than your brothers.
The Old Bear had seemed pleased by the dagger, but he preferred a steel knife at his belt, Jon had noticed . Mormont could offer no answers as to who might have buried the cloak or what it might mean . Perhaps Qhorin will know . The Halfhand had ventured deeper into the wild than any other living man.
A slower death than elsewise.
… don ' t … tell … Sansa!
Ghost was trotting along beside Jon ' s horse with tail held high, his white fur ruffed up thick against the rain . He moved so silently Jon could not have said just when he appeared . Grenn ' s mount shied at the scent of him; even now, after more than a year, the horses were uneasy in the presence of the direwolf . Jon spurred off to Craster ' s Keep . [BOS] With me, Ghost . [EOS] 
The rest was arrowheads, a torrent of arrowheads, a flood of arrowheads, arrowheads enough to drown the last few stones and shells, and all the copper pennies too.
He was a friend to the Watch . Qhorin glanced behind . It is said that a direwolf runs with you.
Arya disentangled herself from him and made a face . Nothing . I was all packed and everything . She gestured at the huge chest, no more than a third full, and at the clothes that were scattered all over the room . Septa Mordane says I have to do it all over . My things weren ' t properly folded, she says . A proper southron lady doesn ' t just throw her clothes inside her chest like old rags, she says.
Jon had never liked Theon Greyjoy, but he had been their father ' s ward . Another spasm of pain twisted up his leg, and the next he knew he was flat on his back again . There ' s some mistake, he insisted . At Queenscrown I saw a direwolf, a grey direwolf . . . grey . . . it knew me . If Bran was dead, could some part of him live on in his wolf, as Orell lived within his eagle?
He wanted it, Jon knew then . He wanted it as much as he had ever wanted anything . I have always wanted it, he thought, guiltily . May the gods forgive me . It was a hunger inside him, sharp as a dragonglass blade . A hunger . . . he could feel it . It was food he needed, prey, a red deer that stank of fear or a great elk proud and defiant . He needed to kill and fill his belly with fresh meat and hot dark blood . His mouth began to water with the thought.
They had moved him back to his old cell in tumbledown Hardin ' s Tower after the fire, and it was there he returned . Ghost was curled up asleep beside the door, but he lifted his head at the sound of Jon ' s boots . The direwolf ' s red eyes were darker than garnets and wiser than men . Jon knelt, scratched his ear, and showed him the pommel of the sword . Look . It ' s you.
The north . I . . . my brother Robb was King in the North . . .
Jon heard a rustling from the red leaves above . Two branches parted, and he glimpsed a little man moving from limb to limb as easily as a squirrel . Bedwyck stood no more than five feet tall, but the grey streaks in his hair showed his age . The other rangers called him Giant . He sat in a fork of the tree over their heads and said, [BOS] There ' s water to the north . A lake, might be . A few flint hills rising to the west, not very high . Nothing else to see, my lords . [EOS] 
No, but—
I warned you he was false . Varamyr ' s tone was mild, but his shadow-cat was staring at Jon hungrily through slitted grey eyes . I never did like the smell o ' him.
I won ' t keep you from the Old Bear . Noye clapped him on the shoulder and smiled . May the gods go with you on the morrow, Snow . You bring back that uncle of yours, you hear?
The Old Bear seemed pleased by that . I suppose they do . You ' ll want to wear that over the shoulder, I imagine . It ' s too long for the hip, at least until you ' ve put on a few inches . And you ' ll need to work at your two-handed strikes as well . Ser Endrew can show you some moves, when your burns have healed.
Dareon and Sam left with him . They descended to the yard in silence . Outside, Jon looked up at the Wall shining in the sun, the melting ice creeping down its side in a hundred thin fingers . Jon ' s rage was such that he would have smashed it all in an instant, and the world be damned.
Soon the Wall . He pictured his friends drinking mulled wine in the common hall . Hobb would be with his kettles, Donal Noye at his forge, Maester Aemon in his rooms beneath the rookery . And the Old Bear? Sam, Grenn, Dolorous Edd, Dywen with his wooden teeth . . . Jon could only pray that some had escaped the Fist.
To ask that Samwell Tarly be taken from training and accepted as a brother of the Night ' s Watch.
Jon put his spurs to horseflesh, and the mare bolted for the door . For an instant Sam stood his ground, his face as round and pale as the moon behind him, his mouth a widening O of surprise . At the last moment, when they were almost on him, he jumped aside as Jon had known he would, stumbled, and fell . The mare leapt over him, out into the night.
He found Maester Aemon up in the rookery, feeding the ravens . Clydas was with him, carrying a bucket of chopped meat as they shuffled from cage to cage . Sam said you wanted me?
Jon knew Qhorin Halfhand the instant he saw him, though they had never met . The big ranger was half a legend in the Watch; a man of slow words and swift action, tall and straight as a spear, long-limbed and solemn . Unlike his men, he was clean-shaven . His hair fell from beneath his helm in a heavy braid touched with hoarfrost, and the blacks he wore were so faded they might have been greys . Only thumb and forefinger remained on the hand that held the reins; the other fingers had been sheared off catching a wildling ' s axe that would otherwise have split his skull . It was told that he had thrust his maimed fist into the face of the axeman so the blood spurted into his eyes, and slew him while he was blind . Since that day, the wildlings beyond the Wall had known no foe more implacable.
Sam yawned . Maester Aemon sent me to find maps for the Lord Commander . I never thought . . . Jon, the books, have you ever seen their like? There are thousands!
No archer could have asked for an easier shot . The Thenns had their backs to the King ' s Tower as they charged the crescent, clambering over bags and barrels to reach the men in black . Both Jon and Satin chanced to choose the same target . He had just reached the top of the barricade when an arrow sprouted from his neck and a quarrel between his shoulder blades . Half a heartbeat later a longsword took him in the belly and he fell back onto the man behind him . Jon reached down to his quiver and found it empty again . Satin was winding back his crossbow . He left him to it and went for more arrows, but he hadn ' t taken more than three steps before the trap slammed open three feet in front of him . Bloody hell, I never even heard the door break.
The long low note lingered at the edge of hearing . The sentries at the ringwall stood still in their footsteps, breath frosting and heads turned toward the west . As the sound of the horn faded, even the wind ceased to blow . Men rolled from their blankets and reached for spears and swordbelts, moving quietly, listening . A horse whickered and was hushed . For a heartbeat it seemed as if the whole forest were holding its breath . The brothers of the Night ' s Watch waited for a second blast, praying they should not hear it, fearing that they would.
Even then, Ygritte persisted . The day before last, Jon had made the mistake of wishing he had hot water for a bath . Cold is better, she had said at once, if you ' ve got someone to warm you up after . The river ' s only part ice yet, go on.
When he closed his eyes, he dreamed of direwolves.
Smallwood pushed to his feet . As my lord commands . On the way out, he frowned at Jon, as if it were somehow his fault.
They walked the rest of the way, past more cookfires and more tents, with Ghost following at their heels . Jon had never seen so many wildlings . He wondered if anyone ever had . The camp goes on forever, he reflected, but it ' s more a hundred camps than one, and each more vulnerable than the last . Stretched out over long leagues, the wildlings had no defenses to speak of, no pits nor sharpened stakes, only small groups of outriders patrolling their perimeters . Each group or clan or village had simply stopped where they wanted, as soon as they saw others stopping or found a likely spot . The free folk . If his brothers were to catch them in such disarray, many of them would pay for that freedom with their life ' s blood . They had numbers, but the Night ' s Watch had discipline, and in battle discipline beats numbers nine times of every ten, his father had once told him.
As the stars began to fade in the eastern sky, the Wall appeared before him, rising above the trees and the morning mists . Moonlight glimmered pale against the ice . He urged the gelding on, following the muddy slick road until he saw the stone towers and timbered halls of Castle Black huddled like broken toys beneath the great cliff of ice . By then the Wall glowed pink and purple with the first light of dawn.
Scattered lights flickered through the trees ahead of him, on both sides of the road: Mole ' s Town . A dog barked as he rode through, and he heard a mule ' s raucous haw from the stable, but otherwise the village was still . Here and there the glow of hearth fires shone through shuttered windows, leaking between wooden slats, but only a few.
Ghost emerged from the undergrowth so suddenly that the garron shied and reared . The white wolf hunted well away from the line of march, but he was not having much better fortune than the foragers Smallwood sent out after game . The woods were as empty as the villages, Dywen had told him one night around the fire . We ' re a large party, Jon had said . The game ' s probably been frightened away by all the noise we make on the march.
Maester Aemon had counted more than a hundred name days, Jon knew . Frail, shrunken, wizened, and blind, it was hard to imagine him as a little boy no older than Arya.
Tell him what you will, said Maester Aemon, gently . He will smile, nod, and forget . Thirty years ago Ser Wynton Stout came within a dozen votes of being Lord Commander . He would have made a fine one . Ten years ago he would still have been capable . No longer . You know that as well as Donal did, Jon.
I ' ve told you the truth . Our garrons were failing, and Rattleshirt was close behind us . Qhorin told me to pretend to join the wildlings . ‘ You must not balk, whatever is asked of you, ' he said . He knew they would make me kill him . Rattleshirt was going to kill him anyway, he knew that too.
Jon remained standing . [BOS] It ' s my father, isn ' t it? [EOS] 
Inside, the hall was immense and drafty, even with a fire roaring in its great hearth . Crows nested in the timbers of its lofty ceiling . Jon heard their cries overhead as he accepted a bowl of stew and a heel of black bread from the day ' s cooks . Grenn and Toad and some of the others were seated at the bench nearest the warmth, laughing and cursing each other in rough voices . Jon eyed them thoughtfully for a moment . Then he chose a spot at the far end of the hall, well away from the other diners.
Jon told the King-beyond-the-Wall, [BOS] Believe what you will, but I knew nothing of any attack . [EOS] 
You ' re the one who named me Lord Snow, said Jon . Ser Alliser had been fond of naming the boys he trained, during his time as Castle Black ' s master-at-arms . The Old Bear had sent Thorne to Eastwatch-by-the-Sea . These others must be Eastwatch men . The bird reached Cotter Pyke and he ' s sent us help . How many men have you brought? he asked the man behind the table.
It was well past dark and the storm was raging by the time they reached the place . The village sat beside a lake, and had been so long abandoned that most of the houses had collapsed . Even the small timber inn that must once have been a welcome sight for travelers stood half-fallen and roofless . We will find scant shelter here, Jon thought gloomily . Whenever the lightning flashed he could see a stone roundtower rising from an island out in the lake, but without boats they had no way to reach it.
In the midst of the baggage train, Jon passed Samwell Tarly, slumped in his saddle under a wide floppy hat . He was riding one dray horse and leading the others . The drumming of the rain against the hoods of their cages had the ravens squawking and fluttering . Jon called out . [BOS] You put a fox in with them? [EOS] 
In the Lord of Bones?
Do you mislike the girl? Tormund asked him as they passed another twenty mammoths, these bearing wildlings in tall wooden towers instead of giants.
The farther in they went, the closer the cliffs pressed to either side . They followed the moonlit ribbon of stream back toward its source . Icicles bearded its stony banks, but Jon could still hear the sound of rushing water beneath the thin hard crust.
Jon shouted, sitting up . He could still feel the talons, the pain . [BOS] Ghost! Ghost, to me! [EOS] 
We ' re sending you, Lord Snow . Ser Alliser smiled.
No, he thought . The Wall protects the realm . From the Others . . . and from you and your kind as well, sweetling . I had another friend who dreamed of dragons . A dwarf . He told me—
Fair? Dareon sneered . The girl was waiting for me, naked as the day she was born . She pulled me through the window, and you talk to me of fair? He walked off.
Even then, Ser Alliser would not call an end . On your feet, Ser Piggy, he called . Pick up your sword . When the boy continued to cling to the ground, Thorne gestured to Halder . Hit him with the flat of your blade until he finds his feet . Halder delivered a tentative smack to his foe ' s upraised cheeks . You can hit harder than that, Thorne taunted . Halder took hold of his longsword with both hands and brought it down so hard the blow split leather, even on the flat . The new boy screeched in pain.
Jon, did you ever wonder why the men of the Night ' s Watch take no wives and father no children? Maester Aemon asked.
The hunters approached warily, perhaps fearing arrows . Jon counted fourteen, with eight dogs . Their large round shields were made of skins stretched over woven wicker and painted with skulls . About half of them hid their faces behind crude helms of wood and boiled leather . On either wing, archers notched shafts to the strings of small wood-and-horn bows, but did not loose . The rest seemed to be armed with spears and mauls . One had a chipped stone axe . They wore only what bits of armor they had looted from dead rangers or stolen during raids . Wildlings did not mine or smelt, and there were few smiths and fewer forges north of the Wall.
He knew, he thought numbly . He knew what they would ask of me . He thought of Samwell Tarly then, of Grenn and Dolorous Edd, of Pyp and Toad back at Castle Black . Had he lost them all, as he had lost Bran and Rickon and Robb? Who was he now? What was he?
Garth of Oldtown, Ollo Lophand, Dirk . . . thieves, cowards and killers, the lot of them . We should have seen it coming . The Watch is not what it was . Too few honest men to keep the rogues in line . Donal Noye turned the maester ' s blades in the fire . A dozen true men made it back . Dolorous Edd, Giant, your friend the Aurochs . We had the tale from them.
Grenn gave Pyp a strange look . He doesn ' t know.
On his way back, Jon swung wide of the column ' s line of march and took a shorter path through the thick of the wood . The sounds of man and horse diminished, swallowed up by the wet green wild, and soon enough he could hear only the steady wash of rain against leaf and tree and rock . It was midafternoon, yet the forest seemed as dark as dusk . Jon wove a path between rocks and puddles, past great oaks, grey-green sentinels, and black-barked ironwoods . In places the branches wove a canopy overhead and he was given a moment ' s respite from the drumming of the rain against his head . As he rode past a lightning-blasted chestnut tree overgrown with wild white roses, he heard something rustling in the underbrush . Ghost, he called out . Ghost, to me.
The mare was blown, but Jon could not let up on her . He had to reach the Wall before the Magnar . He would have slept in the saddle if he ' d had one; lacking that, it was hard enough to stay ahorse while awake . His wounded leg grew ever more painful . He dare not rest long enough to let it heal . Instead he ripped it open anew each time he mounted up.
Mormont frowned . A dead man tried to kill me . How well could I be? He scratched under his chin . His shaggy grey beard had been singed in the fire, and he ' d hacked it off . The pale stubble of his new whiskers made him look old, disreputable, and grumpy . You do not look well . How is your hand?
A long silence . Then: Yes . And Yes, the raven muttered, strutting . Yes, yes, yes.
Lord Snow? he heard . Soft and meek . He turned.
Die! the raven cried.
Me . The ranger they called Stonesnake had already shown that he was the best climber among them . It would have to be him.
The Old Bear rolled up the paper . Your firsts will instruct you in your duties . May all the gods preserve you, brothers . The Lord Commander favored them with a half bow, and took his leave . Ser Alliser went with him, a thin smile on his face . Jon had never seen the master-at-arms look quite so happy.
Whatever pride his lord father might have felt at Samwell ' s birth vanished as the boy grew up plump, soft, and awkward . Sam loved to listen to music and make his own songs, to wear soft velvets, to play in the castle kitchen beside the cooks, drinking in the rich smells as he snitched lemon cakes and blueberry tarts . His passions were books and kittens and dancing, clumsy as he was . But he grew ill at the sight of blood, and wept to see even a chicken slaughtered . A dozen masters-at-arms came and went at Horn Hill, trying to turn Samwell into the knight his father wanted . The boy was cursed and caned, slapped and starved . One man had him sleep in his chainmail to make him more martial . Another dressed him in his mother ' s clothing and paraded him through the bailey to shame him into valor . He only grew fatter and more frightened, until Lord Randyll ' s disappointment turned to anger and then to loathing . One time, Sam confided, his voice dropping from a whisper, two men came to the castle, warlocks from Qarth with white skin and blue lips . They slaughtered a bull aurochs and made me bathe in the hot blood, but it didn ' t make me brave as they ' d promised . I got sick and retched . Father had them scourged.
Gone? He can ' t be gone, not now . It ' s started.
That made the wildling grin . Well said, lad . I see your cloak is black . Mance won ' t like that . If you ' ve come to change sides again, best climb back on that Wall o ' yours.
The comet ' s so bright you can see it by day now, Sam said, shading his eyes with a fistful of books.
Across the long lake, one of the mounds moved . He watched it more closely and saw that it was not dirt at all, but alive, a shaggy lumbering beast with a snake for a nose and tusks larger than those of the greatest boar that had ever lived . And the thing riding it was huge as well, and his shape was wrong, too thick in the leg and hips to be a man.
The gate is lost . Donal Noye had closed and chained it, but it was there for the taking, the iron bars glimmering red with reflected firelight, the cold black tunnel behind . No one had fallen back to defend it; the only safety was on top of the Wall, seven hundred feet up the crooked wooden stairs.
He ' s off hunting . Ghost did not like to travel with the column, but he would not be far . When they made camp for the night, he ' d find his way to Jon at the Lord Commander ' s tent.
Skinchanger? said Ebben grimly, looking at the Halfhand . Does he mean the eagle? Jon wondered . Or me? Skinchangers and wargs belonged in Old Nan ' s stories, not in the world he had lived in all his life . Yet here, in this strange bleak wilderness of rock and ice, it was not hard to believe.
Jon remembered a spray of red blood on white snow, and the way Theon Greyjoy had kicked the dead man ' s head . The man was a deserter . On the way back to Winterfell, Jon and Robb had raced, and found six direwolf pups in the snow . A thousand years ago.
Jarman Buckwell . He returned a fortnight past . His scouts claim they saw you with their own eyes, riding along beside the wildling column and wearing a sheepskin cloak . Noye eyed him . I see the last part ' s true.
The next time you answer me with a question, I will give you to my Lord of Bones, Mance Rayder promised Jon . He stepped closer . Who led here?
Near the edge of the village, Jon came face-to-face with one of the guards Styr had posted . The Thenn growled something in the Old Tongue and pointed his spear back toward the inn . Get back where you belong, Jon guessed . But where is that?
Corn, the raven cried . Mormont did not answer at once . When he did he said only, Did your wolf find game today?
He had almost forgotten about his face . A skinchanger tried to rip out my eye.
Ride? It was dark beyond the fire, and the night was cold . Ride where?
Ghost should be back by dawn . He hunts at night.
The grotto was pitch-dark by the time they finished . The only light was the dim glow of the passage back up to the larger cavern, where a score of fires burned . They were soon fumbling and bumping into each other as they tried to dress in the dark . Ygritte stumbled into the pool and screeched at the cold of the water . When Jon laughed, she pulled him in too . They wrestled and splashed in the dark, and then she was in his arms again, and it turned out they were not finished after all.
Jon said, as much to himself as to the others . Their only hope was to try and crush the turtle when it reached the Wall . For that, they needed boulders . No matter how stoutly built the turtle was, a huge chunk of rock crashing straight down on top of it from seven hundred feet was bound to do some damage . [BOS] The hides won ' t burn, Grenn, Owen, Kegs, it ' s time . [EOS] 
The Wall can stop an army, but not a man alone . I took a lute and a bag of silver, scaled the ice near Long Barrow, walked a few leagues south of the New Gift, and bought a horse . All in all I made much better time than Robert, who was traveling with a ponderous great wheelhouse to keep his queen in comfort . A day south of Winterfell I came up on him and fell in with his company . Freeriders and hedge knights are always attaching themselves to royal processions, in hopes of finding service with the king, and my lute gained me easy acceptance . He laughed . I know every bawdy song that ' s ever been made, north or south of the Wall . So there you are . The night your father feasted Robert, I sat in the back of his hall on a bench with the other freeriders, listening to Orland of Oldtown play the high harp and sing of dead kings beneath the sea . I betook of your lord father ' s meat and mead, had a look at Kingslayer and Imp . . . and made passing note of Lord Eddard ' s children and the wolf pups that ran at their heels.
Jon looked down dully . It was true . His wound had opened again . [BOS] An arrow wound . . . [EOS] 
Jon said . [BOS] My friends brought me back, [EOS] 
Three-quarters of the village had taken Jon ' s warning to heart and come to Castle Black for refuge . Noye had decreed that every man still spry enough to hold a spear or swing an axe would help defend the barricade, else they could damn well go home and take their chances with the Thenns . He had emptied the armory to put good steel in their hands; big double-bladed axes, razor-sharp daggers, longswords, maces, spiked morningstars . Clad in studded leather jerkins and mail hauberks, with greaves for their legs and gorgets to keep their heads on their shoulders, a few of them even looked like soldiers . In a bad light . If you squint.
Mormont moved to the fire . The Halfhand . And past time . He had grown more restive every day they waited; much longer and he would have been fit to whelp cubs . See that there ' s hot food for the men and fodder for the horses . I ' ll see Qhorin at once.
What are you doing here, bastard? Thorne asked.
The black brothers moved through black shadows amidst black rocks, working their way up a steep, twisting trail as their breath frosted in the black air . Jon felt almost naked without his mail, but he did not miss its weight . This was hard going, and slow . To hurry here was to risk a broken ankle or worse . Stonesnake seemed to know where to put his feet as if by instinct, but Jon needed to be more careful on the broken, uneven ground.
Qhorin went to his garron . Back, not on.
If she was so good, she should have torn that Wall down.
That sounds more like me, said Tormund . Well met, Jon Snow . I am fond o ' wargs, as it happens, though not o ' Starks.
The Watch has need of every man it can get, Donal Noye said when they were alone . Even men like Toad . You won ' t win any honors killing him.
Samwell Tarly awaited them in the old stables, slumped on the ground against a bale of hay, too anxious to sleep . He rose and brushed himself off . I … I ' m glad they found you, Jon.
His face was throbbing . Tormund stood over them bellowing, he saw from his right eye as he rubbed blood from his left . Then there were hoofbeats, shouts, and the clacking of old dry bones.
I should like to hear them both, Sam admitted, but they would not want me there . His face was troubled . He ' s going to make me fight again on the morrow, isn ' t he?
When they entered the solar, the raven spied them at once . Snow! the bird shrieked . Mormont broke off his conversation . Took you long enough with those maps . He pushed the remains of breakfast out of the way to make room on the table . Put them here . I ' ll have a look at them later.
The Old Bear snorted . Do you think they chose me Lord Commander of the Night ' s Watch because I ' m dumb as a stump, Snow? Aemon told me you ' d go . I told him you ' d be back . I know my men … and my boys too . Honor set you on the kingsroad … and honor brought you back.
I need the north.
Unless he was slain as well, Ser Jaremy insisted.
Oh, be quiet, the Old Bear told it . Snow, how soon does Maester Aemon say you ' ll have use of that hand back?
What is it you smell, Dywen? asked Grenn.
Sam swallowed, stepped back, and scurried out so quickly he almost tripped over the rushes.
East, the skinchanger repeated . Something ' s coming.
Jon lowered his sword . [BOS] Go, [EOS] he muttered.
Like Ice, she said . She looked at the blade in her hand . Does this have a name? Oh, tell me.
A watcher, said Stonesnake . A wildling . Finish her.
I think he means for you to have a crown, my lord.
The world was grey darkness, smelling of pine and moss and cold . Pale mists rose from the black earth as the riders threaded their way through the scatter of stones and scraggly trees, down toward the welcoming fires strewn like jewels across the floor of the river valley below . There were more fires than Jon Snow could count, hundreds of fires, thousands, a second river of flickery lights along the banks of the icy white Milkwater . The fingers of his sword hand opened and closed.
Thorne was much the more clever of the two, Jon realized; this had his stink all over it . He was trapped . I ' ll go, he said in a clipped, curt voice.
His eyes stung . Jon rubbed at them savagely, cursing the smoke . He swallowed another gulp of wine and watched his direwolf devour the chicken.
Something cold moved in her eyes . I told you to leave, she said . We don ' t want you here.
And powerful . Jon could feel the power.
Perhaps, said Qhorin, finishing the egg, but there is more, I think . He is seeking something in the high cold places . He is searching for something he needs.
Then the skinchanger threw back his head and screamed.
Man and boy I ' ve served the Watch, and ranged as far as any, said Ebben . I ' ve seen the bones of giants, and heard many a queer tale, but no more . I want to see them with my own eyes.
Jon followed his finger, and found himself in a dim back room wandering through a maze of columns and stalactites . She can ' t be here, he was thinking, when he heard her laugh . He turned toward the sound, but within ten paces he was in a dead end, facing a blank wall of rose and white flowstone . Baffled, he made his way back the way he ' d come, and then he saw it: a dark hole under an outthrust of wet stone . He knelt, listened, heard the faint sound of water . [BOS] Ygritte? [EOS] 
Jon followed the rest back to the armory, walking alone . He often walked alone here . There were almost twenty in the group he trained with, yet not one he could call a friend . Most were two or three years his senior, yet not one was half the fighter Robb had been at fourteen . Dareon was quick but afraid of being hit . Pyp used his sword like a dagger, Jeren was weak as a girl, Grenn slow and clumsy . Halder ' s blows were brutally hard but he ran right into your attacks . The more time he spent with them, the more Jon despised them.
Qhorin snorted . I see no lord . Only a dog dressed in chickenbones, who rattles when he rides.
Nor me . There was anger in that admission, and bitterness too deep for words . Raymun Redbeard, Bael the Bard, Gendel and Gorne, the Horned Lord, they all came south to conquer, but I ' ve come with my tail between my legs to hide behind your Wall . He touched the horn again . If I sound the Horn of Winter, the Wall will fall . Or so the songs would have me believe . There are those among my people who want nothing more . . .
Mance ran a hand along the curve of the great horn . No man goes hunting with only one arrow in his quiver, he said . I had hoped that Styr and Jarl would take your brothers unawares, and open the gate for us . I drew your garrison away with feints and raids and secondary attacks . Bowen Marsh swallowed that lure as I knew he would, but your band of cripples and orphans proved to be more stubborn than anticipated . Don ' t think you ' ve stopped us, though . The truth is, you are too few and we are too many . I could continue the attack here and still send ten thousand men to cross the Bay of Seals on rafts and take Eastwatch from the rear . I could storm the Shadow Tower too, I know the approaches as well as any man alive . I could send men and mammoths to dig out the gates at the castles you ' ve abandoned, all of them at once.
It made him feel half a fool to talk of such things to Qhorin and the other rangers, but he did as he was commanded . None of the black brothers laughed at him, however . By the time he was done, even Squire Dalbridge was no longer smiling.
Jon hesitated . He did feel proud when he won . Why shouldn ' t he? But the armorer was taking that away too, making it sound as if he were doing something wrong . [BOS] They ' re all older than me, [EOS] he said defensively.
I ' ll . . . I ' ll be your wife, if you like . My father, he ' s got nineteen now, one less won ' t hurt him none.
The light was shifting all about her, Jon noticed suddenly . He looked around . We had best go up . The torch is almost done.
There ' s a truer song than the one you sang in my tent . Mance looked to Harma Dogshead . How many horses have we found?
Jon kept silent.
Jon said . [BOS] Talk, Have you seen the Wall? [EOS] 
Qhorin ' s mouth tightened as he followed its flight with his eyes . Here is as good a place as any to make a stand, he declared . The mouth of the cave shelters us from above, and they cannot get behind us without passing through the mountain . Is your sword sharp, Jon Snow?
When Lord Mormont said, We ' re not like to find another place as strong . We ' ll carry water, and make certain we are well supplied, Jon knew better than to argue . So the command was given, and the brothers of the Night ' s Watch raised their camp behind the stone ring the First Men had made . Black tents sprouted like mushrooms after a rain, and blankets and bedrolls covered the bare ground . Stewards tethered the garrons in long lines, and saw them fed and watered . Foresters took their axes to the trees in the waning afternoon light to harvest enough wood to see them through the night . A score of builders set to clearing brush, digging latrines, and untying their bundles of fire-hardened stakes . I will have every opening in the ringwall ditched and staked before dark, the Old Bear had commanded.
Pycelle makes no mention of them, but doubtless they ' ll be treated gently . I will ask about them when I write . Mormont shook his head . This could not have happened at a worse time . If ever the realm needed a strong king … there are dark days and cold nights ahead, I feel it in my bones … He gave Jon a long shrewd look . I hope you are not thinking of doing anything stupid, boy.
I heard water . I wanted t ' see how deep the cave went . She pointed with the torch . There ' s a passage goes down further . I followed it a hundred paces before I turned back.
But not all he saw was warlike . He saw women dancing as well, and heard a baby crying, and a little boy ran in front of his garron, all bundled up in fur and breathless from play . Sheep and goats wandered freely, while oxen plodded along the riverbank in search of grass . The smell of roast mutton drifted from one cookfire, and at another he saw a boar turning on a wooden spit.
They were friends as well as brothers, Jon realized, and now they are sworn foes . Why did he desert?
Yes . Jon knelt, and Sam knelt beside him.
Ygritte said you never found the horn.
I heard Hake say the dead men were your uncle ' s, Pyp said.
Bael the Bard, said Jon, remembering the tale that Ygritte had told him in the Frostfangs, the night he ' d almost killed her.
Dywen sucked at his wooden teeth . Might be they didn ' t die here . Might be someone brought ' em and left ' em for us . A warning, as like . The old forester peered down suspiciously . And might be I ' m a fool, but I don ' t know that Othor never had no blue eyes afore.
Blood, said Mance Rayder . I ' d win in the end, yes, but you ' d bleed me, and my people have bled enough.
I remember, said Jon with a startled laugh . A young black brother on the wallwalk, yes . . . You swore not to tell.
The mouth of the cave was a cleft in the rock barely wide enough for a horse, half concealed behind a soldier pine . It opened to the north, so the glows of the fires within would not be visible from the Wall . Even if by some mischance a patrol should happen to pass atop the Wall tonight, they would see nothing but hills and pines and the icy sheen of starlight on a half-frozen lake . Mance Rayder had planned his thrust well.
A bully? Jon almost choked on the word . The accusation was so unjust it took his breath away . They were the ones who came after me . Four of them.
Strong, his own bird said, preening . Strong, strong.
Now, he said, before my wits return . Go.
Tormund Giantsbane seemed to me the sort of man who would make a good friend and a bad enemy, Your Grace.
One against seven? Halder gave a signal . The boys spread out, surrounding him.
The Eastwatch men threw the captive roughly to the floor . Lord Slynt frowned down at him . Is this the one you spoke of?
We can hope so . There were worse things than wildlings in the dark . Jon remembered the words the wildling king had spoken on the Fist of the First Men, as they stood amidst that pink snow . When the dead walk, walls and stakes and swords mean nothing . You cannot fight the dead, Jon Snow . No man knows that half so well as me . Just thinking of it made the wind seem a little colder.
The fire melted the silver off the pommel and burnt the crossguard and grip . Well, dry leather and old wood, what could you expect? The blade, now … you ' d need a fire a hundred times as hot to harm the blade . Mormont shoved the scabbard across the rough oak planks . I had the rest made anew . Take it.
The morning sky was streaked by thin grey clouds, but the pale red line was there behind them . The black brothers had dubbed the wanderer Mormont ' s Torch, saying (only half in jest) that the gods must have sent it to light the old man ' s way through the haunted forest.
Jon said . He rose . Standing, he was taller than the dwarf . It made him feel strange . [BOS] I know, [EOS] 
The scorpions bolts punched deep into the pelts, but did no more damage than the fire arrows . The rocks went bouncing off the turtle ' s roof, leaving dimples in the thick layers of hides . A stone from one of the trebuchets might have crushed it, but the one machine was still broken, and the wildlings had gone wide around the area where the other dropped its loads.
Within the rock, the passage descended twenty feet before it opened out onto a space as large as Winterfell ' s Great Hall . Cookfires burned amongst the columns, their smoke rising to blacken the stony ceiling . The horses had been hobbled along one wall, beside a shallow pool . A sinkhole in the center of the floor opened on what might have been an even greater cavern below, though the darkness made it hard to tell . Jon could hear the soft rushing sound of an underground stream somewhere below as well.
Mormont looked at Jon . What is your will in this?
Still, he prayed his father ' s gods might spare him that bleak task . The host moved but slowly, burdened as it was by all the wildlings ' herds and children and mean little treasures, and the snows had slowed its progress even more . Most of the column was out of the foothills now, oozing down along the west bank of the Milkwater like honey on a cold winter ' s morning, following the course of the river into the heart of the haunted forest.
Gods be good, Dywen muttered . That ' s a hand.
He won ' t hurt you . He knew at once what had happened; a wooden hutch, its slats shattered, lay on its side in the wet grass . He must have been hungry . We haven ' t seen much game . Jon whistled . The direwolf bolted down the rabbit, crunching the small bones between his teeth, and padded over to him.
Do you think I want to spend the rest of my life washing an old man ' s smallclothes?
He could see the kingsroad wending its way south through stony brown fields and over windswept hills . The Magnar would be coming up that road before the day was done, his Thenns marching behind him with axes and spears in their hands and their bronze-and-leather shields on their backs . Grigg the Goat, Quort, Big Boil, and the rest will be coming as well . And Ygritte . The wildlings had never been his friends, he had not allowed them to be his friends, but her . . .
All Jon could hear was the falling water and the faint crackle of flames . This way under the Wall was lost as well?
If they planned an attack they never told me about it . Jon did not believe it . Lord Janos lacked the men to attack the wildling camp . Besides, he was on the wrong side of the Wall, and the gate was sealed with rubble . He had a different sort of treachery in mind, this can ' t be his work.
The other two teams had no happily placed trees to give them a leg up, and before long the Thenns were wondering whether they had gotten lost climbing the ridge . Jarl ' s party were all on the Wall and eighty feet up before the leading climbers from the other groups came into view . The teams were spaced a good twenty yards apart . Jarl ' s four were in the center . To the right of them was a team headed up by Grigg the Goat, whose long blond braid made him easy to spot from below . To the left a very thin man named Errok led the climbers.
Aye, and long before them came the Horned Lord and the brother kings Gendel and Gorne, and in ancient days Joramun, who blew the Horn of Winter and woke giants from the earth . Each man of them broke his strength on the Wall, or was broken by the power of Winterfell on the far side . . . but the Night ' s Watch is only a shadow of what we were, and who remains to oppose the wildlings besides us? The Lord of Winterfell is dead, and his heir has marched his strength south to fight the Lannisters . The wildlings may never again have such a chance as this . I knew Mance Rayder, Jon . He is an oathbreaker, yes . . . but he has eyes to see, and no man has ever dared to name him faintheart.
So, the girl called when she saw him, d ' you believe us now, Jon Snow? Did you see the giants on their mammoths?
When the dreams took him, he found himself back home once more, splashing in the hot pools beneath a huge white weirwood that had his father ' s face . Ygritte was with him, laughing at him, shedding her skins till she was naked as her name day, trying to kiss him, but he couldn ' t, not with his father watching . He was the blood of Winterfell, a man of the Night ' s Watch . I will not father a bastard, he told her . I will not . I will not . You know nothing, Jon Snow, she whispered, her skin dissolving in the hot water, the flesh beneath sloughing off her bones until only skull and skeleton remained, and the pool bubbled thick and red.
They say shouting . Might be it ' s ghosts.
Jon urged her . It would be hours before Qhorin came up, and a story would help keep him awake . [BOS] Tell me, I want to hear this tale of yours . [EOS] 
When has Stannis Baratheon ever had much good to say of anyone? Ser Alliser ' s flinty voice was unmistakable . If we let Stannis choose our Lord Commander, we become his bannermen in all but name . Tywin Lannister is not like to forget that, and you know it will be Lord Tywin who wins in the end . He ' s already beaten Stannis once, on the Blackwater.
They won ' t trouble us, Ygritte said . It ' s the dead they ' ve come for . Cats can smell blood six miles off . They ' ll stay near the bodies till they ' ve eaten every last stringy shred o ' meat, and cracked the bones for the marrow.
Is the crow afeared o ' Gendel ' s children? she said, with a grin . It ' s only a little way up, and I ' m not done with you, Jon Snow . She pushed him back down on the clothes and straddled him . Would you . . . She hesitated.
I belong with my brother.
And then the years were gone, and he was back at Winterfell once more, wearing a quilted leather coat in place of mail and plate . His sword was made of wood, and it was Robb who stood facing him, not Iron Emmett.
Is this one of the direwolves I ' ve heard so much of? a familiar voice asked close at hand.
I did . Though it was his doing more than mine.
Jon was stunned . Robert Baratheon had looked old and fat when he visited Winterfell, yet he ' d seemed hale enough, and there ' d been no talk of illness . [BOS] How can you know? [EOS] 
Sam . Jon stood . What is it? Do you want to see the sword? If the others had known, no doubt Sam did too.
Bael the Bard made it, said Ygritte . He was King-beyond-the-Wall a long time back . All the free folk know his songs, but might be you don ' t sing them in the south.
So there you have us, Jon Snow, said Mance Rayder . The King-beyond-the-Wall and his court, such as it is . And now some words from you, I think . Where did you come from?
I think so, Arya said.
Toad stepped close . The little lordling has a mouth on him, he said . He had pig eyes, small and shiny . Is that your mommy ' s mouth, bastard? What was she, some whore? Tell us her name . Maybe I had her a time or two . He laughed.
He pulled Longclaw over a shoulder . Aren ' t you afraid?
The Magnar ' s a lord on Skagos, Noye said . There were Skagossons at Eastwatch when I first came to the Wall, I remember hearing them talk of him.
Jon said . [BOS] All we could wasn ' t enough, [EOS] 
Well, thirty of us will be warm and dry, Jon thought once he ' d gotten a good look at the hall . Perhaps as many as fifty . The place was much too small to sleep two hundred men, so most would need to remain outside . And where to put them? The rain had turned half the compound yard to ankle-deep puddles and the rest to sucking mud . Another dismal night was in prospect.
The two from the Fingers pulled him off, throwing him roughly to the ground . Grenn began to kick at him . Jon was rolling away from the blows when a booming voice cut through the gloom of the armory . STOP THIS! NOW!
Ghost loped ahead of them . The grounds seemed deserted this morning, with so many rangers off at the brothel in Mole ' s Town, digging for buried treasure and drinking themselves blind . Grenn had gone with them . Pyp and Halder and Toad had offered to buy him his first woman to celebrate his first ranging . They ' d wanted Jon and Sam to come as well, but Sam was almost as frightened of whores as he was of the haunted forest, and Jon had wanted no part of it . Do what you want, he told Toad, I took a vow.
I ' m sorry, lad . There ' s been no sign of him . They limped up to the maester ' s door, in the long wooden keep beneath the rookery . The armorer gave it a kick . Clydas!
She wiped her hands on her skirt . M ' lord—
We call them merlons . They were painted gold a long time ago . This is Queenscrown.
Yes, this place will do . The Old Bear lifted a hand to the wind, and raven landed on his forearm, claws scrabbling against his black ringmail.
He woke to the sight of his own breath misting in the cold morning air . When he moved, his bones ached . Ghost was gone, the fire burnt out . Jon reached to pull aside the cloak he ' d hung over the rock, and found it stiff and frozen . He crept beneath it and stood up in a forest turned to crystal.
Jon agreed . His voice was flat and tired . The visit had taken all the strength from him . [BOS] You Starks are hard to kill, [EOS] 
The weariness came on him suddenly, as he donned the roughspun blacks that were their everyday wear . He sat on a bench, his fingers fumbling with the fastenings on his cloak . So cold, he thought, remembering the warm halls of Winterfell, where the hot waters ran through the walls like blood through a man ' s body . There was scant warmth to be found in Castle Black; the walls were cold here, and the people colder.
Lord Snow . Ser Alliser Thorne had named him that, to mock his bastard birth . Many of his brothers had taken to using it as well, some with affection, others to wound . But suddenly it had a different sound to it in Jon ' s ears . It sounded . . . real . Yes, he said, hesitantly, kings have legitimized bastards before, but . . . I am still a brother of the Night ' s Watch . I knelt before a heart tree and swore to hold no lands and father no children.
Who was your mother?
The maester nodded . I did indeed . Clydas, give Jon the bucket . Perhaps he will be kind enough to assist me . The hunched, pink-eyed brother handed Jon the bucket and scurried down the ladder . Toss the meat into the cages, Aemon instructed him . The birds will do the rest.
Donal Noye turned toward the two great trebuchets that Bowen Marsh had restored to working order . Give me light! he roared.
We could do with fresh meat . Mormont dug into a sack and offered his raven a handful of corn . You think I ' m wrong to keep the rangers close?
Jon objected, [BOS] But, the Wall . . . [EOS] 
Bastard of Winterfell and brother to kings, mocked Chett, who ' d left his hounds to see what the commotion was about.
Jon scarcely heard him . He brushed off Tyrion ' s hand and strode across the hall . He was running by the time he hit the doors . He raced to the Commander ' s Keep, dashing through drifts of old snow . When the guards passed him, he took the tower steps two at a time . By the time he burst into the presence of the Lord Commander, his boots were soaked and Jon was wild-eyed and panting . Bran, he said . What does it say about Bran?
That was so absurd Jon had to smile . By who? he said, looking for his friends . This had to be one of Pyp ' s japes, surely . But Pyp shrugged at him, and Grenn shook his head . It was Dolorous Edd Tollett who stood . By me . Aye, it ' s a terrible cruel thing to do to a friend, but better you than me.
Ghost was gone when the wildings led their horses from the cave . Did he understand about Castle Black? Jon took a breath of the crisp morning air and allowed himself to hope . The eastern sky was pink near the horizon and pale grey higher up . The Sword of the Morning still hung in the south, the bright white star in its hilt blazing like a diamond in the dawn, but the blacks and greys of the darkling forest were turning once again to greens and golds, reds and russets . And above the soldier pines and oaks and ash and sentinels stood the Wall, the ice pale and glimmering beneath the dust and dirt that pocked its surface.
When he heard the rattle of the winch chains and the iron groan of the cage door opening, he knew it would be Hobb bringing their breakfast as he did every morning . The sight of Mance ' s turtle had robbed Jon of his appetite . Their oil was all but gone, and the last barrel of pitch had been rolled off the Wall two nights ago . They would soon run short of arrows as well, and there were no fletchers making more . And the night before last, a raven had come from the west, from Ser Denys Mallister . Bowen Marsh had chased the wildlings all the way to the Shadow Tower, it seemed, and then farther, down into the gloom of the Gorge . At the Bridge of Skulls he had met the Weeper and three hundred wildlings and won a bloody battle . But the victory had been a costly one . More than a hundred brothers slain, among them Ser Endrew Tarth and Ser Aladale Wynch . The Old Pomegranate himself had been carried back to the Shadow Tower sorely wounded . Maester Mullin was tending him, but it would be some time before he was fit to return to Castle Black.
Jon confessed . [BOS] It ' s all true, As far as it goes . [EOS] 
They found Dolorous Edd frying a rasher of bacon and boiling a dozen eggs in a kettle over the Old Bear ' s cookfire . Mormont sat in his wood-and-leather camp chair . I had begun to fear for you . Did you meet with trouble?
Jon found parchment, quill, and ink in his saddlebag and brought them to the Lord Commander . At Whitetree, Mormont scrawled . The fourth village . All empty . The wildlings are gone . Find Tarly and see that he gets this on its way, he said as he handed Jon the message . When he whistled, his raven came flapping down to land on his horse ' s head . Corn, the raven suggested, bobbing . The horse whickered.
Did I say it was your honor? Mormont inspected his plate.
Stonesnake warmed his hands over the fire . What waits beyond the pass?
We may escape them yet, the ranger said . Or not.
The Giant ' s Stair might serve, said Ser Mallador Locke, or the Skirling Pass, if it ' s clear.
I ' m First Ranger now, with Ben Stark lost and Ser Jaremy killed, Smallwood said stubbornly . The command should be mine.
And suddenly Jon Snow was ashamed.
That ' s a woman for you . One day she ' s kissing you, the next she ' s filling you with arrows.
Jon said . It wasn ' t actually true yet, but it would be . [BOS] If I wasn ' t here, he ' d tear out your throat, [EOS] 
He did not have to search for targets now; only choose them . He dropped a wildling archer as he was fitting an arrow to his string, then sent a shaft toward the axeman hacking at the door of Hardin ' s Tower . That time he missed, but the arrow quivering in the oak made the wildling reconsider . It was only as he was running off that Jon recognized Big Boil . Half a heartbeat later, old Mully put an arrow through his leg from the roof of the Flint Barracks, and he crawled off bleeding . That will stop him bitching about his boil, Jon thought.
It happened quickly . One mole fled and then another, and suddenly all the villagers were throwing down their weapons and abandoning the barricade . The brothers were too few to hold alone . Jon watched them try and form a line to fall back in order, but the Thenns washed over them with spear and axe, and then they were fleeing too . Dornish Dilly slipped and went down on his face, and a wildling planted a spear between his shoulder blades . Kegs, slow and short of breath, had almost reached the bottom step when a Thenn caught the end of his cloak and yanked him around . . . but a crossbow quarrel dropped the man before his axe could fall . Got him, Satin crowed, as Kegs staggered to the stair and began to crawl up the steps on hands and knees.
I have a place at court, though, the dwarf said, smiling . A word in the right ear, and you ' ll die a sour old man before you get another boy to train . Now tell Snow why the Old Bear needs to see him . Is there news of his uncle?
He gave her closest nipple a playful pinch . I was a man of the Night ' s Watch . Was, he heard himself say . What was he now? He did not want to look at that . Were you a maid?
Jon commanded, and Kegs blew two long blasts, to wake Grenn and the other sleepers who ' d had the watch during the night . If the wildlings were coming, the Wall would need every man . Gods know, we have few enough . Jon looked at Pyp and Kegs and Satin, Horse and Owen the Oaf, Tim Tangletongue, Mully, Spare Boot, and the rest, and tried to imagine them going belly to belly and blade to blade against a hundred screaming wildlings in the freezing darkness of that tunnel, with only a few iron bars between them . That was what it would come down to, unless they could stop the turtle before the gate was breached . [BOS] Sound the warhorn, [EOS] 
My sword is Valyrian steel . The Old Bear gave it to me.
Good Queen Alysanne, they called her later . One of the castles on the Wall was named for her as well . Queensgate . Before her visit they called it Snowgate.
Jon said . [BOS] He brought down part, On his head . [EOS] 
Jon turned away, and went inside the tent.
Jon barked, and Grenn and Kegs slammed their shoulders against the next barrel, and sent it tottering out into empty air . [BOS] Again, [EOS] 
To his left, the catapult made a thunk and filled the air with spinning stones . They plonked down on the turtle like hail, and caromed harmlessly aside . The wildling archers were still loosing arrows from behind their mantlets . One thudded into the face of a straw man, and Pyp said, Four for Watt of Long Lake! We have a tie! The next shaft whistled past his own ear, however . Fie! he shouted down . I ' m not in the tourney!
A dream, said Jon feebly . I was Ghost, I was on the edge of the mountain looking down on a frozen river, and something attacked me . A bird . . . an eagle, I think . . .
There was nothing Jon could say to that . He nodded.
She shrugged . Might be it did, might be it didn ' t . It is a good song, though . My mother used to sing it to me . She was a woman too, Jon Snow . Like yours . She rubbed her throat where his dirk had cut her . The song ends when they find the babe, but there is a darker end to the story . Thirty years later, when Bael was King-beyond-the-Wall and led the free folk south, it was young Lord Stark who met him at the Frozen Ford . . . and killed him, for Bael would not harm his own son when they met sword to sword.
He was chilled and feverish, and suddenly the weight of the longbow was too much . The battle with the Magnar had been nothing, he realized, and the night fight less than nothing, only a probe, a dagger in the dark to try and catch them unprepared . The real battle was only now beginning.
I might get her with child.
But once the Wall is fallen, Dalla said, what will stop the Others?
Up, Rattleshirt told Jon . Mance is up top.
The black arrows hissed downward, like snakes on feathered wings . Jon did not wait to see where they struck . He reached for a second arrow as soon as the first left his bow . NOTCH . DRAW . LOOSE . As soon as the arrow flew he found another . NOTCH . DRAW . LOOSE . Again, and then again . Jon shouted for the trebuchet, and heard the creak and heavy thud as a hundred spiked steel caltrops went spinning through the air . Catapults, he called, scorpions . Bowmen, loose at will . Wildling arrows were striking the Wall now, a hundred feet below them . A second giant spun and staggered . Notch, draw, loose . A mammoth veered into another beside it, spilling giants on the ground . Notch, draw, loose . The ram was down and done, he saw, the giants who ' d pushed it dead or dying . Fire arrows, he shouted . I want that ram burning . The screams of wounded mammoths and the booming cries of giants mingled with the drums and pipes to make an awful music, yet still his archers drew and loosed, as if they ' d all gone as deaf as dead Dick Follard . They might be the dregs of the order, but they were men of the Night ' s Watch, or near enough as made no matter . That ' s why they shall not pass.
In Mance Rayder?
